ROLEPLAYING GAME CORE RULES
Rodney Thompson • Logan Bonner • Matthew Sernett
CREDITS
Design
Rodney Thompson (lead),
Logan Bonner, Matthew Sernett
Development
Peter Schaefer
Additional Development
Andy Collins, Jeremy Crawford, Mike Mearls,
Stephen Schubert, Rodney Thompson
Editing
Greg Bilsland (lead), Jeremy Crawford,
Dawn J. Geluso, Ray Vallese
Managing Editing
Kim Mohan
D&D R&D/Book Publishing Director
Bill Slavicsek
D&D Creative Manager
Christopher Perkins
D&D Design Manager
James Wyatt
D&D Development and Editing Manager
Andy Collins
D&D Senior Creative Art Director
Jon Schindehette
D&D Brand Team
Liz Schuh, Jesse Decker, Kierin Chase,
Laura Tommervik, Shelly Mazzanoble,
Chris Lindsay, Hilary Ross
Art Director
Kate Irwin
Graphic Designers
Leon Cortez, Keven Smith, Emi Tanji,
Add'I Design byjino Choi, Yasuyo Dunnett
Interior Illustrations
Dave Allsop, Steve Argyle, Daren
Bader, Zoltan Boros & Gabor Szikszai,
Chippy, Stephen Crowe, Julie Dillon,
Wayne England, Jason A. Engle,
Carl Frank, Lars Grant-West, David
Griffith, Fred Hooper, Michael Komarck,
Todd Lockwood, W a r r e n Mahy, Raven
M i m u r a j im Nelson, W i l l i am O'Connor,
rk post, Steve Prescott, Wayne Reynolds,
Marc Sasso, Ron Spears, Anne Stokes,
Sarah Stone, Arnie Swekel, Francis Tsai,
Udon, Pete Venters, Eva Widermann,
Sam Wood, Ben Wootten
Publishing Production Specialists
Angelika Lokotz, Erin Dorries
Prepress Manager
Jefferson Dunlap
Imaging Technician
Carmen Cheung, Ashley Brock
Production Manager
Cynda Callaway
D&D 4th Edition Design
Rob Heinsoo, Andy Collins, James W y a tt
Building on the Design of Previous Editions by
E. Gary Gygax, Dave Arneson,
David "Zeb" Cook, Jonathan Tweet,
Monte Cook, Skip Williams, Richard Baker,
Peter Adkison
WIZARDS OF THE COAST,
BELGIUM
Industrialaan 1
1702 Groot-Bijgaarden
Belgium
+32.070.233.277
U.S., CANADA, ASIA, PACIFIC,
& LATIN AMERICA
Wizards of the Coast LLC
P.O. Box 707
Renton WA 98057-0707
+1-800-324-6496
EUROPEAN HEADQUARTERS
Hasbro UK Ltd
Caswell Way
Newport, Gwent NP9 0VH
GREAT BRITAIN
Please keep this address for your records
620-24465000-001 EN ISBN: 978-0-7869-5631-9
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, d20, d20 System, WIZARDS OF THE COAST, Monster Vault, Dungeon Master's Kit, Rules Compendium, all
other Wizards of the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast LLC In the U.S.A. and
other countries. All Wizards characters and the distinctive likenesses thereof are property of Wizards of the Coast LLC. This material Is
protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the iii.ttcrl.il nr .irtwoik
contained herein Is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast LLC. Any simllarlly In at lu.tl people,
organizations, pl,n ej, or events Im lutled herein Is purely colncIdental. Printed In China. 'O2010 Wizards of tin-1 nasi 11 (
Visit our wrhslle al www.dungetmsantltlra){iins,(om
CONTENTS
MONSTERS A-Z
Angel
Archon
Basilisk
Beholder
Bulette
Carrion Crawler....
Cyclops
Death Knight
Demon
Devil
Displacer Beast. .
Doppelganger
Dragon
Dragonborn
Drake
D rider
Dryad
Duergar
Dwarf
Efreet
Elemental
Elf
Lttin
Gargoyle
Ghoul
Giant
Githyanki
Gnoll
Gnome
Goblin
Golem
Hag
Halfling
Human
Kobold
Lich
Lizardfolk
Lycanthrope
Manticore
Medusa
Mind Flayer
Minotaur
Mummy
Ogre
Ooze
Ore
Otyugh
Owlbear
Purple Worm....
Rakshasa
4
.12
.16
.20
.24
.28
.32
.36
.40
.44
.50
.56
.60
.64
.80
. 82
. 86
. 90
. 94
100
102
106
110
118
122
126
130
138
142
148
.152
160
.164
.168
.170
.178
182
186
.192
.196
.200
.204
.208
. 2 12
. 2 16
. 2 20
. 2 24
. 2 30
..234
. 2 38
. 2 42
Roper
Rust Monster
Skeleton
Stirge
Tiefling
Treant
Troglodyte
Troll
Umber Hulk
Vampire
Wraith
Yuan-ti
Zombie
APPENDIX: ANIMALS
GLOSSARY
MONSTERS BY LEVEL
MONSTERS A-Z
They lurk in the shadows. They beat down the doors. They wrap their slimy
tentacles around you and drag you down into a hole. They come with fire, axes,
spells, and teeth. They are the creatures of D U N G E O N S & DRAGONS®, and they are
yours to command.
Monster Vault is a reference for Dungeon Masters that contains the essential
monsters of the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game. Inside the pages of this book, you'll
find a codex of monsters and villains to
throw at the heroes as they delve into
dungeons or stage attacks on planar
fortresses. You can use this book as a
reference when running published
adventures or as a tool when designing
your own encounters.
Most monster entries in this book
begin with a two-page spread consisting
of an illustration of a monster and
some lore about its origin, habits, allies,
and ecology. You'll also find information
on how to run the monster in both combat and noncombat encounters, as
well as details about adventure and campaign hooks related to a monster.
Following the illustration and lore is a series of monster statistics blocks representing
different varieties of a type of monster. You can use these statistics blocks
together or with other monsters described in a creature's lore. You might also
mix and match monsters as appropriate for your campaign or adventure. The
monsters have a variety of roles and levels, allowing you to utilize the creatures
throughout the heroes' adventuring careers.
MONSTER STATISTICS BLOCKS
Monster statistics are presented in a format designed to be easy to use and reference.
This section describes the typical components of a statistics block.
Name
Each statistics block begins with the creature's name. Most names include the
general name of the monster type plus an additional descriptor, such as "githyanki
warrior" or "deathpledged gnoll." In some cases, these descriptive names
reflect titles adopted by the monsters themselves, perhaps reflecting a particular
status in the monster's society. Many others are descriptions applied to the
monster, often by its victims.
Inside the pages of this
book, you'll find monsters
and villains to throw at the
heroes. You can use this
book as a reference or as
a tool.
4 \ Montti'is /
Level and Role
A monster's level and role are tools for you to use when building an encounter.
The Dungeon Master's Kit explains how to use these tools.
Level: A monster's level summarizes how tough it is in an encounter. Level determines
most of the monster's statistics as well as the experience point (XP)
award the PCs earn for defeating it.
Role: A monster's role describes its preferred combat tactics, much as a character
class's role suggests tactics for characters of that class. Monster roles are artillery,
brute, controller, lurker, skirmisher, and soldier.
A monster might have a second role: elite, solo, or minion. Elite monsters
and solo monsters are tougher than standard monsters, and minions are
weaker. For the purpose of encounter building, an elite monster counts as
two standard monsters of its level, a solo monster counts as five, and four to
six minions count as one—four at heroic tier (levels 1-10), five at paragon tier
(levels 11-20), and six at epic tier (levels 21-30).
In addition, a monster might have the leader subrole, indicating that it
grants some sort of boon to its allies, such as a beneficial aura.
Size
A creature's size determines its space as well as its reach. A creature might have a
greater reach depending on the characteristics of its body.
Monster Size Space Typical Reach
Tiny 1/2 x 1/2 0
Small 1 x 1 1
Medium 1 X 1 m m t w m t m w M m
Large 2 x 2 1 or 2
Huge 3 x 3 2 or 3
Gargantuan 4 x 4 or larger 3 or 4
Space: This is the area (measured in squares) that a creature occupies on the
battle grid.
Reach: Typically, the reach of a creature using a melee attack power is the same
as the range entry of that power. If you need to determine a creature's reach
for some other purpose, such as for a grab attack or an attempt to pick up an
object, refer to the table above.
Even if a creature's reach or melee range is greater than 1, the creature
can't make opportunity attacks against targets that aren't adjacent to it.
A creature that has a melee attack with a range of 0 must occupy at least 1
square of the space of its target to make the attack.
Origin
A monster's origin—aberrant, elemental, fey, immortal, natural, or shadowdescribes
its place in the D U N G E O N S & D R A G O N S cosmology. See the glossary for
information about each origin.
Type
A creature's type—animate, beast, humanoid, or magical beast—summarizes
some basic facts about its appearance and behavior. See the glossary for information
about each type.
Keywords/Race Some monsters have keywords that further define
them. These keywords represent groups of monsters, such as demon, devil,
dragon, and undead. See the glossary for information about monster keywords.
This part of the entry might also include a monster's race if its race is not
included in the monster's name.
XP Value
The experience point award for defeating this creature is given beneath its level
and role.
HP/Initiative
The monster's maximum hit points, bloodied value, and modifier to initiative
checks are on the top line of its statistics.
Defenses/Perception
All four defense scores are on the next line, along with the monster's Perception
modifier (often used at the start of an encounter).
Senses
Some monsters have special senses, such as darkvision or tremorsense. Any such
senses are noted below a monster's Perception modifier, and these terms are
defined in the glossary.
Speed
A monster's speed represents the number of squares it can move when taking a
move action to walk. If a monster has alternative movement modes, such as fly,
climb, or swim, that fact is noted in its "Speed" entry. Special modes of movement
are defined in the glossary.
Immune
If a monster is immune to a damage type (such as cold or fire), it doesn't take that
type of damage. If a monster is immune to a condition or another effect (such as
the dazed condition or forced movement), it is unaffected by that condition or
effect. If a monster is immune to charm, fear, illusion, poison, or sleep, it is unaffected
by the nondamaging effects of a power that has that keyword.
Immunity to one part of a power does not make a monster immune to other
parts of the power. For example, a thunder power deals no thunder damage to a
creature that is immune to thunder, but the power could still push the creature.
Resist
Resistance means a creature takes less damage from a specific damage type.
For example, if a creature has resist 5 fire, the creature takes 5 less fire damage
whenever it takes that type of damage.
Against Combined Damage Types: A creature's resistance is ineffective
against combined damage types unless the creature has resistance to each of
the damage types, and then only the weakest of the resistances applies.
For example, if a creature has resist 10 lightning and resist 5 thunder and
an attack deals 15 lightning and thunder damage to it, the creature takes 10
damage, for the resistance to the combined damage types is limited by the
lesser of the two resistances.
Not Cumulative: Resistances against the same damage type are not cumulative.
Only the highest resistance applies. For example, if a creature has resist 5 cold
and gains resist 10 cold, the creature has resist 10 cold, not resist 15 cold.
Vulnerable
Being vulnerable to a damage type means a creature takes extra damage from
that damage type. For example, if a creature has vulnerable 5 fire, the creature
takes 5 extra fire damage whenever it takes that type of damage.
Against Combined Damage Types: Vulnerability to a specific damage type
applies even when that damage type is combined with another. For example,
if a creature has vulnerable 5 fire, the creature takes 5 extra damage when it
takes ongoing fire and radiant damage.
Not Cumulative: Vulnerabilities to the same damage type are not cumulative.
Only the highest vulnerability applies. For example, if a creature has
vulnerable 5 psychic and then gains vulnerable 10 psychic, the creature has
vulnerable 10 psychic, not vulnerable 15 psychic.
Saving Throws
Some monsters have bonuses to saving throws. A monster adds its bonuses to its
saving throw result to see if an effect ends.
MONSI I:K STATISTICS 11LOCKS
Action Points
Elite and solo monsters typically have action points they can spend to take extra
actions, just as player characters do. Unlike characters, a monster can spend
more than 1 action point in an encounter, but only 1 per round.
Traits
The Traits section includes characteristics of the creature that are not powers.
Many traits are always in effect, such as regeneration or the ability to deal extra
damage on certain attacks. Others can be turned on or off, such as an aura or a
benefit for a creature's mount or rider.
Aura An aura power creates an aura, which is a continuous effect that
emanates from a creature. It's denoted by a special icon (O). and the aura's
size is noted to the right of its name. Unless noted otherwise, an aura uses the
following rules.
Fills an Area: The aura fills each square that is both within a specified range
of the creature and within line of effect of it. An aura 1 affects each square
adjacent to the creature, for example. A creature is normally unaffected by its
own aura.
Unaffected by the Environment: The aura is unaffected by environmental
phenomena and terrain, although blocking terrain blocks an aura. For
instance, an aura of fire is unaffected by an area of extreme cold.
Overlapping Auras: If auras overlap and impose penalties to the same roll or
game statistic, a creature affected by the overlapping auras is subjected to the
worst penalty; the penalties are not cumulative. For instance, if a creature is
affected by three overlapping auras that each impose a -2 penalty to attack
rolls, the creature takes a -2 penalty, not a - 6 penalty.
Deactivating an Aura: A creature can take a minor action to deactivate or reactivate
one of its auras.
Death or Unconsciousness Ends: A creature's auras end immediately when it
falls unconscious or dies.
Action Type
A monster's standard, move, minor, and nontriggered free actions are organized
by action type.
Powers A monster's powers are presented under their respective action type
in order of frequency of usage, from at-will to recharge to encounter powers.
Icon/Type The name line of an attack power includes an icon (if applicable) that
represents the power's type: melee (-f), ranged (^f), close (•<*), or area HJ-).
8 \ MontWis /\ z
A basic attack has a circle around its icon, denoting a melee basic attack © or
ranged basic attack © .
Usage A monster power is usable at will, once per encounter (or rarely once per
day), or it recharges in certain circumstances.
Recharge [TT] IE] I'll: The power has a random chance of recharging during each
round of combat. At the start of each of the monster's turns, roll a d6. If the
roll is one of the die results shown in the power description, the monster
regains the use of that power. The power also recharges after a short rest.
Recharge if/when . . . : The power recharges in a specific circumstance, such
as when the monster is first bloodied during an encounter. The power also
recharges after a short rest.
Requirement Some powers have a precondition that must be met for a
monster to use the power.
Attack A monster power that has an attack roll is usually an attack power.
Sometimes an "Attack" entry includes special information about a component of
that entry.
Type and Range A power's type and range are given first on the power's
"Attack" entry. The types are melee, ranged, area, and close. Each type has rules
for range and targeting, detailed in the Rules Compendium.
Targets In parentheses after the attack type and range is information that
describes which or how many creatures a power targets.
Attack Bonus/Defense Usually, the last element in a power's "Attack" entry is
the monster's attack bonus and the defense the power targets.
H i t This entry describes what happens to each target that a monster hits with a
power's attack.
Miss This entry describes what happens to each target that a monster misses
with a power's attack.
"Half damage" in this entry refers to rolled damage. Roll the damage specified
in the "Hit" entry and deal half of that damage to each target the monster misses.
"Half damage" does not apply to ongoing damage or any other damaging effects
in the "Hit" entry.
Effect Anything that appears in an "Effect" entry occurs when the monster
uses the power, whether or not it hits with it. Some "Effect" entries include range,
type, and target information.
UllMt I I I I LTiriUTI/'ki UI III
Secondary Attack Some powers allow a monster to make second
ary attack. A "Hit," a "Miss," or an "Effect" entry tells you if a monster makes a
secondary attack. Unless otherwise noted, the attack type and the range of a
secondary attack are the same as the power's, and the secondary attack doesn't
require a separate action. As with normal attacks, the target of a secondary attack
is identified after the attack's type and range.
Sustain If a power has a "Sustain" entry, the monster can keep part of that
power active by taking a specific type of action before the end of each of its turns.
A monster can't take the sustaining action until the turn after it uses the power.
The entry's name specifies the action type that must be taken—most often minor,
move, or standard. See the Rules Compendium for more about sustaining powers.
Aftereffect An aftereffect automatically occurs after another effect ends. In
a power description, an "Aftereffect" entry follows the effect it applies to.
A target is sometimes subjected to an aftereffect after a save. If that save
occurs when the target is rolling multiple saving throws, the aftereffect takes
effect after the target has rolled all of them.
Failed Saving Throw Sometimes an effect changes as a target fails
saving throws against it. The new effect, specified in a "First Failed Saving
Throw" or a "Second Failed Saving Throw" entry, takes effect after the target fails
a saving throw against the previous effect at the end of the target's turn. A few
effects also specify something that happens on "Each Failed Saving Throw." This
is a new effect that is repeated whenever a target fails a saving throw against the
effect during the end of its turn.
An effect doesn't change if the creature fails a saving throw against it at a time
other than the end of its turn.
Special Any unusual information about the use of a power appears in this
entry. For example, some powers can be used as basic attacks, which is noted in a
"Special" entry.
Triggered Actions
This section contains powers that have triggers. These powers have a few entries
that other powers don't.
T r i g g e r A trigger defines when a monster is able to use a power. A monster
must still be able to take the power's required action and meet any requirements.
(Action) A triggered power's action type is given in parentheses at the
start of its "Attack" entry or its "Effect" entry. The type might be an immediate
reaction, an immediate interrupt, an opportunity action, or a free action. Some
powers require no action to use; they simply occur in response to a trigger.
S 1 0 I Monsters A Z
Skills
The skills section of a monster's statistics block includes only trained skills or
skills for which the monster has an unusual modifier. A monster's Perception
modifier isn't repeated here, even if Perception is trained.
Ability Scores
A monster's six ability scores are included toward the bottom of its statistics
block. Following each score in parentheses is the adjusted ability score modifier,
including one-half the monster's level, which is useful whenever the monster
needs to make an untrained skill check or an ability check.
Alignment
A monster's most typical alignment is noted in its statistics block. The Rules Compendium
contains information on the various alignments.
Languages
This entry gives the languages that a monster can speak and understand. An
individual monster might know additional languages, such as Common or the
languages of its companions. See the Rules Compendium for more information
about the languages of the D U N G E O N S & D R A G O N S world.
Equipment
A monster's "Equipment" entry notes important items a monster is carrying.
A monster might carry equipment that is not noted here. Equipment that is
unimportant to a monster is left for the Dungeon Master to decide.
If a character gains a monster's equipment, he or she can use it as normal
gear. A character does not gain the powers that a monster uses through a piece
of equipment.
A piece of equipment that player characters use does not necessarily have the
same properties for monsters. For example, a greataxe has the high crit property,
but a monster using the item does not benefit from the property unless otherwise
noted in its statistics.
Healing Surges
Monsters have healing surges. However, few monsters have powers that let them
spend healing surges. The number of healing surges a monster has is based on
its level: 1-10, one healing surge; 11-20, two healing surges; 21 or higher, three
healing surges.
Because they rarely come into play, healing surges are not included in a monster's
statistics block.
ANGEL
Beautiful and terrible, the bright sight of an angel strikes awe into the soul and drives
onlookers to their knees in obeisance to the divine order. Yet angels can do more than
deliver the miracles of the gods. They are destroyers, too, and the appearance of an angel
is a harbinger of woe as often as it is a sign of hope.
As manifestations of divine will, angels involve themselves in mortal concerns
far more often than do deities or exarchs. Angels act both openly and secretly,
serving as emissaries, generals, or assassins. Although one ordinary mortal in ten
thousand might count himself lucky to have his life touched by an angel, those
who intrude into the affairs of the gods can expect to meet dozens of angelsmost
likely on the field of battle.
Offspring of the Astral Eternity: Angels serve the gods, leading some
people to believe that they were created by the gods. In reality, angels are powerful
astral beings that appeared during
„ , T ,, the first moments of the formation of Long ago, I swore an oath thc Astral Sea. Angels are made of the
to Bahamut That oath is same spirit as the gods, created as part
the onli y tmhi i•n g ki eepi•n g you of the original compact of heaven. They J* as exprJsions ofthe Astral
alive." Sea, sentient energy in humanoid
form. Perhaps the needs of the gods
—Anclravar, caused the astral stuff to spew angels
ans;el of Veens forth, but it was not a conscious act of
creation. Different types of angels have
different callings; they are manifestations of celestial vocations, such as protection,
battle, and vengeance. Although their appearances can vary, all angels are
vaguely humanoid in form, with masculine or feminine features and lower
bodies that trail off into flowing energy.
Servants to the Divine Masters: During the Dawn War between the gods
and the primordials, angels fought for the deities that best exemplified their callings.
Today they serve as mercenaries for anyone willing to meet their price, be
it wealth, power, or a cause worthy of their attention. In this way, the gods share
angels with mortals. Most angels are nameless servitors that take pride in having
scant personalities, which allows them to flow smoothly into the service of any
god that calls them. The angels' mission is to perform the will ofthe deities, not
to cling to one god and promote its cause above those of all others.
Not all angels adhere to these standard behaviors. Some feel suited for service
to a single god, adapting elements of that deity's ornamentation and symbolism
into neutral angelic dress. Other angels develop strong personalities and choose
names. These forceful angels might become exarchs ofthe gods they serve or
carve bizarre paths through the Astral Sea before they disappear, are destroyed,
or fade from existence.
VT
Constrained by Divine Laws: The gods and their servants often li.n
flicting goals. As a result, angels sometimes battle one another, liven so. th<\
cannot be persuaded to lend their energy to rituals or sacrifices thai would
imperil a deity or eliminate a large number of rival angels. They will light c.n li
other in single combat or in groups of a dozen at a time, if that is the wish of .1
god or other wielder of divine power, but they will not willingly destroy plan,11
gates, shatter astral dominions, or slay deities. No angel can make a direct assault
upon a god—at least, not without dire consequences for the angel and perhaps tincompact
ofheaven.
An angel follows other rules and codes of conduct derived from the deity
it serves. An angel of Kord must be forthright and valorous, whereas Vecna
demands that his angels be circumspect and conniving. An angel might be
bound by ancient oaths to one god while it serves another, and much can hinge
on the angel's delicate balancing of conflicting obligations.
A n g e l of P r o t e c t i on
Medium immortal humanoid (angel)
L e v e l 14 S o l d i er
XP 1,000
TRAITS
STANDARD ACTIONS
HP 141; Bloodied 70
AC 30, Fortitude 26, Reflex 24, W i l l 25
Speed 6, fly 8 (hover)
Immune fear; Resist 10 radiant
Initiative +12
Perception +11
O Angelic Shield • Aura 5
While the angel is not bloodied and within S squares of its ward, squares in the aura are difficult
terrain for enemies.
Angelic Presence
While the angel is not bloodied, attack rolls against it take a -2 penalty.
© Greatsword (radiant, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 11 radiant damage.
Ward • At-Will
Effect: Ranged 5 (one creature). The angel designates the target as its ward. While the angel is
within S squares of the target, the target takes half damage from melee attacks and ranged
attacks against it, and the angel takes an equal amount of damage. While the angel is adjacent
to the target, the target gains a +2 bonus to AC. A creature can be the ward of only one angel
at a time. If multiple angels designate the same creature as their wards, it becomes the ward of
the last angel to designate it as such.
Skills Insight +16
Str 22 (+13)
Con 21 (+12)
Alignment unaligned
Equipment greatsword
Languages Supernal
TRAITS
A n g e l of B a t t l e Level 15 S k i r m i s h er
Large immortal humanoid (angel) XP 1,200
HP 148; Bloodied 74
AC 29, Fortitude 27, Reflex 25, W i l l 28
Speed 8, fly 12 (hover)
Immune fear; Resist 10 radiant
Initiative +13
Perception+11 J
I
Angelic Presence
While the angel is not bloodied, attack rolls against it take a
-2 penalty.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Falchion (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +20 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 5 damage, and the target grants combat advantage until the start of the angel's next
turn.
\ Mobile Melee Attack • At-Will
Effect: The angel moves up to half its speed and uses falchion once at any point during the movement.
The angel doesn't provoke opportunity attacks when moving away from the target of
the attack.
•<" Storm of Blades • Encounter
Attack: Close burst 3 (enemies in the burst); +20 vs. AC
Hit: 6d8 + 7 damage.
Effect: The angel's fly speed changes to 2 (hover) until the end of the encounter.
Str 23 (+13) Dex 19 (+11) Wis 18 (+11)
Con 20 (+12) Int 15 (+9) Cha25(+14)
Alignment unaligned Languages Supernal
Equipment falchion
A n g e l of V a l o r V e t e r a n Level 16 M i n i o n S o l d i er
Medium immortal humanoid (angel) XP 350
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +12
AC 32, Fortitude 30, Reflex 27, W i l l 26 Perception +10
Speed 6, fly 9 (hover)
Immune fear; Resist 10 fire, 10 radiant
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Greatsword (fire, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +21 vs. AC
Hit: 11 fire damage.
Str 24 (+15) Dex 18 (+12) W i s 14 (+10)
Con 18 (+12) Int 12 (+9) Cha 16 (+11)
Alignment unaligned Languages Supernal
Equipment chainmail, greatsword
A n g e l of V e n g e a n ce
Large immortal humanoid (angel)
Level 19 E l i t e B r u te
XP 4,800
HP 426; Bloodied 213
AC 31, Fortitude 33, Reflex 29, W i l l 33
Speed 8, fly 12 (hover)
Immune fear; Resist 15 cold, 15 fire, 15 radiant
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
Initiative+13 f
Perception+16 t
Cloak of Vengeance (cold, fire)
While the angel is not bloodied, attack rolls against it take a
-2 penalty, and any creature that hits the angel with a melee attack
takes 10 cold and fire damage.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Longsword (cold, fire, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +24 vs. AC
Hit: 4d10 + 12 cold and fire damage.
4 Double Attack • At Will
Effect: The angel uses longsword twice.
MINOR ACTIONS
Sign of Vengeance • Encounter
Effect: Ranged sight (one creature). Until the end ofthe encounter, the angel can teleport adja
cent to the target as a move action.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<5* Coldfire Pillar Transformation (cold, fire, polymorph) • Encounter
Trigger: The angel is first bloodied.
Effect (Free Action): The angel becomes a 6-square-high pillar until the start of its next turn.
While in this form, it is immune to all damage. W h e n the effect ends, the angel makes the following
attack.
Attack: Close burst 2 (enemies in the burst); +22 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 18 cold and fire damage.
Skills Insight +21
Sir 27 (+17) Dex 18 (+13) Wis 25 (+16)
Con 13 (+10) Int 19 (+13) Cha26(+17)
Alignment unaligned Languages Supernal
Equipment 2 longswords
A N L L L T .
ARCHON
Opposing the gods is the sole purpose of the archons. Highly intelligent elemental creatures,
archons serve as soldiers and leaders in the armies of the primordials. They also act
as mercenaries for those in need of elemental might.
When the gods brought their armies of angels, exarchs, and exalted beings to
fight the primordials in the Dawn War, the primordials responded by creating
their own soldiers from the elemental foundations of their home plane. The primordials
already had great beasts and chaotic elementals that were being used as
pure weapons, but they needed more reliable and inventive creatures to populate
and lead their armies. Archons were gifted with a degree of cunning not found
in other primordial creations. Each archon is a dangerous opponent, drawing on
unrestrained combat prowess, the keen mind of a veteran soldier, and an elemental
weapon that vanishes when its wielder falls.
"Finding a fire archon forge is a bit like finding a termite
nest in your home. You feel a sense of dread that slowly
dawns into gut-wrenching terror and then decays into
despair."
—Baredd, Champion of Argent
Soldiers in an Elemental Army: Archons fight for the primordials, mainly
as soldiers and officers in their armies but also as special agents and shock
troops. In addition, archons turn up in the service of lesser elemental princes and
powerful beings that roam the Elemental Chaos, including high-ranking demons
ofthe Abyss. More than just mighty warriors, archons engage in unorthodox
tactics to take down their enemies. For example, a squad of archon assassins
might burst through a planar portal to ambush a target's carriage as it travels
between towns, or a team of archons sent to intimidate the locals might appear
during a violent earthquake or ride in on rushing floodwaters for greater effect.
Although archons were created for battle, they also excel in leadership roles;
would-be heroes might be surprised to find that the head of a band of elemental
cultists is an archon put in place by a higher power. Regardless of whether
archons are dispatched to fight or lead, they take full advantage of their elemental
connections to get the job done.
Fighting for the Highest Bidder: Many primordials were slain or imprisoned
after the Dawn War, leaving untold numbers of archons with no masters
to serve. Some were quickly snatched up by formidable rulers of the Elemental
Chaos; those that remained free drifted into a life of mercenary service on the
roiling plane. Efreets, demon lords, giants, and other influential denizens of
the Chaos employ archons as soldiers and bodyguards. Archons have their own
needs and desires, as do other sentient creatures, but where mortals vie for riches
1 6 | Monsters A Z
and power, archons seek opportunities for destruction. The chance to commit
violence and mayhem is a strong lure for archons—after all, the creatines vu n
literally born to fight. It is difficult to bribe an archon with wealth, but present 11
an intriguing destructive challenge (for example, bringing down fortress walls
that have been reinforced with powerful arcane runes) is a sure way to get an
archons interest, if not its servitude.
Cunning Enemies and Tacticians: Unlike their lesser cousins, the elementals,
archons work well together, and each kind brings its own strengths into
play. Whereas earth archons are patient, inexorable defenders, fire archons are
aggressive and highly effective when attacking enemy positions or laying siege.
Water archons travel as easily through rivers and lakes as others do on land;
they make excellent naval forces and can sneak into occupied territory before
launching a surprise attack from behind enemy lines. Ice archons are brilliant,
ruthless tacticians whose calculated plans are devoid of emotion. When united,
archons of different kinds are more destructive than when they act separately,
and the strongest groups are those that have diverse elemental affinities. For
example, water archons might infiltrate a castle by means of an underground
river, opening the gates so that fire archons can spill into the structure and
attack. Earth archons fortify that position and hold the gates open, while ice
archons ensure that no one escapes from the castle to warn nearby villages or
seek reinforcements.
(Top, left to right) earth archon, ice archon, water archon, fire archon
E a r t h A r c h on
Medium elemental humanoid (earth)
HP 149; Bloodied 74
AC 25, Fortitude 26, Reflex 23, W i l l 21
Speed 6 (earth walk)
Immune disease, petrification, poison
TRAITS
Level 12 B r u te
XP 700
Initiative +5
Perception +9
Tremorsense 5
Earth Walk
The archon ignores difficult terrain that is rubble, uneven stone, or an earthen construction.
Shattering Tremors
Whenever the archon takes thunder damage, it is slowed until the end of its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Stony Warhammer • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 4d8 + 7 damage,
•f Avalanche Charge • Recharge when first bloodied
Effect: Before the attack, the archon moves up to its speed.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +15 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 4d12 + 9 damage, and the archon pushes the target up to 2 squares and knocks it prone.
Miss: Half damage, and the target falls prone.
Str 2 3 (+12) Dex 9 (+5) Wis 16 (+9)
Con 19 (+10) Int 18 (+10) Cha 11 (+6)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Primordial
F i r e A r c h o n Level 13 S k i r m i s h er
Medium elemental humanoid (fire) XP 800
HP 130; Bloodied 65 Initiative+14
AC 27, Fortitude 25, Reflex 26, W i l l 23 Perception +9
Speed 8
Immune disease, poison; Resist 20 fire
Guttering Flames
Whenever the archon takes cold damage, it cannot shift until the end of its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Fiery Scimitar (fire) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 + 8 fire damage.
MOVE ACTIONS
Flickering Step • At-Will
Effect: The archon shifts up to half its speed.
Blaze Step (fire) • Encounter
Effect: The archon shifts up to its speed. Each square it shifts through fills with elemental flames
that last until the end ofthe encounter. Each time a nonfire creature enters or starts its turn in
a square filled with these flames, it takes 10 fire damage.
Str 15 (+8) Dex 22 (+12) Wis 17 (+9)
Con 18 (+10) Int 16 (+9) Cha 9 (+5)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Primordial
S 18 l Monster* A /
I c e A r c h on Level 13 S o l d i er
Medium elemental humanoid (cold) XP 800 J
HP 135; Bloodied 67
AC 29, Fortitude 27, Reflex 25, W i l l 22
Speed 6
Immune disease, poison; Resist 20 cold
Initiative +8
Perception +9
0 Chilling Aura • Aura 2
Enemies cannot shift while in the aura.
Melting Ice
Whenever the archon takes fire damage, it lakes ,
next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
) penalty to all defenses until the end of its
© Frigid Mace (cold) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. A(
Hit: 4d6 + 7 cold damage.
Effect: The archon marks each enemy within ) squares of il until the end of the archons next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
+ Frozen Rebuke • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy marked by the archon makes an .ittac k that doesn't Include It as a target.
Attack (Opportunity Action): Melee 1 (triggering runny); I 18 vs. A(
Hit: 2d8 + 5 damage, and the target is weakened until the end of its next turn.
Str 15 (+8) Dex 11 (+6) Wis 17 (I 9)
Con 23 (+12) Int 18 (+10) Cha 11 (t-6)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Primordial
W a t e r A r c h o n Level 14 C o n t r o l l er
Medium elemental humanoid (aquatic, water) XP 1,000
HP 140; Bloodied 70 Initiative+11
AC 28, Fortitude 26, Reflex 24, W i l l 28 Perception +8
Speed 6, swim 6
immune disease, poison; Resist 20 acid
Aquatic
The archon can breathe underwater. In aquatic combat, it gains a +2 bonus to attack rolls
against nonaquatic creatures.
Frozen Waves
Whenever the archon takes cold damage, it is slowed until the end of its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Cresting Staff • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 10 damage, and the target is slowed until the end of the archon's next turn.
•(-Whirlpool • At-Will
Attack: Close burst 3 (enemies in the burst); +17 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 4d6 + 7 damage, and the archon slides the target up to 3 squares.
Miss: The archon can slide the target 1 square.
Str 14 (+9) Dex 18 (+11) Wis 13 (+8)
Con 20 (+12) Int 11 (+7) Cha 22 (+13)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Primordial
ARCHON
BASILISK
The eyes of the basilisk glow with potent magic. Just a glance, and a victim is weakened,
envenomed, or, worst of all, turned to stone. Averting your gaze will not save you, because
a basilisk has teeth as well as eyes.
Rumors and legends shroud the enigmatic basilisk. Unlike many rampaging
beasts, basilisks keep themselves concealed and are not spotted stomping
through fields or tearing up towns. What's more, because the creature's gaze is
so dangerous, few ordinary people have seen a basilisk and survived. The fates
of basilisks' victims can seem mysterious. If a villager disappears and a stone
sculpture that resembles the missing person is later found, people do not necessarily
jump to the conclusion that a basilisk is nearby. They might consider the
situation a sign of magic run rampant, a portent of imminent danger, or a trick
of mischievous fey that kidnapped the victim and left a crude reproduction as a
joke. Similarly, those slain by a venom-eye basilisk might look as though they fell
to a strange plague or were struck down by the god Zehir.
Although wild basilisks live hidden in solitude, the creatures can be domesticated.
A wise master takes no risks with a trained basilisk, recognizing that a
simple slip-up could be deadly. Owners set basilisks as sentries in places where
no allies are present or where servants are expendable. Some basilisk masters
use the remains of victims who have been petrified as morbid decorations.
Statuaries ofthe Fallen: Surrounding the lair of a typical stone-eye basilisk,
statues of humanoids and other creatures stand in awkward, fearful poses,
frozen in the horror of their transformation into rock. These lifeless figures are
the basilisk's victims, and the creature is capable of eating its petrified foes. A
statue that displays large bite marks is a sure sign that a basilisk dwells nearby.
(Other signs include patches of blackened grass and dead shrubs, since the
Mesmeric-Eye B a s i l i sk Level 1 0 S o l d i er
Large natural beast (reptile) XP 500 /,
HP 109; Bloodied 54
AC 26, Fortitude 22, Reflex 20, W i l l 24
Speed 4
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +8
Perception +7
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 5 damage.
V Mesmerizing Gaze (charm, psychic) • At-Will
Attack: Close blast 3 (creatures in the blast); +13 vs. Will
Hit: 2d8 + 7 psychic damage, and the basilisk pulls the target up to 2 squares
Effect: The basilisk marks the target until the end of the basilisk's next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Mesmeric Punishment (charm) • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy marked by and within 5 squares of the basilisk makes an attack that does not
include it as a target.
Attack (Immediate Interrupt): Close burst 5 (triggering enemy); +13 vs. Will
Hit: The target takes a -2 penalty to the triggering attack roll and is dazed (save ends).
Str 16 (+8) Dex 13 (+6) Wis 14 (+7)
Con 17 (+8) Int 2 (+1) Cha 8 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
monster's noxious presence kills plant life near its lair.) The petrified victims
are not dead and can be turned from stone to flesh once again. A rescue mission
to free a petrified person might involve investigating methods of reversing the
transformation, followed by a dangerous journey to the beast's lair.
Pack Predators of the Feywild: In the natural world, most basilisks dwell
alone, living within isolated lairs and leaving only occasionally to hunt. The
basilisks that inhabit the Feywild, however, hunt in packs that leave trails of
desiccated foliage and dead animals in their wake. Reptilian eyes glowing from
between the massive tree trunks of a dark Feywild forest are often the last sight
an explorer sees. Like many creatures of the Feywild, basilisks wander where
they wish. Strong-willed fey magicians can command the creatures, and the evil
giants of the Feywild known as fomorians use basilisks to guard hidden tunnels
that lead to their underground kingdoms.
Demonic Pets: Some greater demons feel a kinship with basilisks and keep
the deadly creatures as pets; lesser demons that venture into the world use
basilisks as guards or guides. A basilisk might stride fearlessly into a city as the
precursor to a brutal demonic massacre. Although ordinary basilisks lead solitary
lives—some can even be called timid—those that serve demons fight with the
same ferocity and cruelty as the spawn of the Abyss. Long ago, a group of basilisks
was taken to different layers of the Abyss, where they grew more deadly in
I he chaos of that evil place. Today, these transformed creatures, or perhaps their
descendants, guard gates that the demons never want opened. No one knows
what lies beyond such doors—perhaps the darkest secrets of the Abyss, or perhaps
unimaginable horrors that even the demons fear.
Venom-Eye B a s i l i s k Level 10 A r t i l l e ry
Large natural beast (reptile) XP 500
HP 87; Bloodied 43 Initiative +6 f
AC 24, Fortitude 23, Reflex 20, W i l l 22 Perception+11 t i
Speed 6
Resist 5 poison If
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 8 damage.
-{J- Venomous Gaze (poison) • At-Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 10 (creatures in the burst); +15 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d8 + 5 poison damage, and ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends). While the target is
taking ongoing poison damage from this attack, the target deals 2 poison damage to each creature
adjacent to it at the start of each of its turns.
Effect: The target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls until the end ofthe basilisk's next turn.
Skills Stealth +11
Str 19 (+9) Dex 12 (+6) Wis 13 (+6)
Con 21 (+10) Int 2 (+1) Cha 8 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
"A basilisk makes a great sentry; if you don't mind
cluttering your entry hall with ugly statues."
—Lathras, Mage of Saruun
W i l t - E y e B a s i l i sk Level 11 C o n t r o l l er
Large natural beast (reptile) XP600
HP 117; Bloodied 58
AC 25, Fortitude 25, Reflex 21, W i l l 23
Speed 4
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative+7 f
Perception+11 J
| t
© Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 10 damage.
Enervating Gaze • At-Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 5 (creatures in the burst); +14 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls (save ends).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target falls unconscious (save ends).
Miss: The target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls until the end ofthe basilisk
Skills Stealth +12
Str 17 (+8) Dex 14 (+7) Wis 12 (+6)
Con 21 (+10) Int 2 (+1) Cha 8 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages —
s next turn.
Momttrt A-Z — ^
B a s i l i sk
Large natural beast (reptile)
Level 12 C o n t r o l l er
XP 700
Initiative +7
Perception +13
HP 126; Bloodied 63
AC 26, Fortitude 26, Reflex 22, W i l l 22
Speed 4
Immune petrification
0 Baleful Gaze • Aura 5
Any enemy in the aura that attacks the basilisk is slowed until the
end of that enemy's next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 7 damage.
•<T Petrifying Gaze • At-Will
Attack: Close blast 3 (creatures in the blast); +15 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The target is immobilized (save ends).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is restrained instead of immobilized (save ends).
Second Failed Saving Throw: The target is petrified.
Miss: The target is slowed until the end of the basilisk's next turn.
Skills Stealth + 12
Str 20 (+11) Dex 12 (+7) Wis 14 (+8)
Con 22 (+12) Int 2 (+2) Cha 8 (+5)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
A b y s s a l B a s i l i sk Level 1 3 A r t i l l e ry
Large elemental beast (reptile) XP 800 J?
HP 106; Bloodied 53
AC 27. Fortitude 26, Reflex 23. W i l l 23
Speed 4
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +7 f,
Perception+13 £
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 5 damage.
-^J- Gaze of Abyssal Horror (charm, psychic) • At-Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 10 (creatures in the burst); +18 vs. Will
Hit: 2d8 + 2 psychic damage, and ongoing 10 psychic damage (save ends).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target makes a melee basic attack or a ranged basic attack
against its nearest ally as a free action.
Second Failed Saving Throw: The target takes ongoing 10 psychic damage and is dominated
(save ends both).
Skills Stealth + 12
Str 19 (+10) Dex 12 (+7)
Con 22 (+12) Int 2 (+2)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages -
W i s 14 (+8)
Cha 8 (+5)
UASILI.SK T n
BEHOLDER
Creatures of abhorrent
shape and alien mind,
beholders seek dominance
over all they survey. The
floating horrors enforce
their will by firing rays of
magic from their eyestalks.
When the unwholesome
plane known as the
Far Realm comes into
tenuous contact with
reality, terrible things
boil across the boundary.
Nightmares form the
thunderhead of psychic
storms that presage the
arrival of warped beings
and forces undreamt of
by the maddest demon
or the vilest devil. Many
aberrant creatures
stumble upon the world
by accident, pushed in
like chill wind through
a door suddenly opened.
Others crash into reality
because it is as loathsome
to them as their
surreal homeland is to all sane natives of the rational planes. Beholders, however,
come as conquerors. Each one seeks to claim all in its sight, and beholders see
much indeed.
Beholders do not belong in the world or in any ofthe planes inhabited by
immortal or elemental, primordial or god. Their home, the Far Realm, is so
antithetical to rational thought that most who glimpse the plane go mad. Like
other unsettling inhabitants of that place, beholders have forms unlike those of
natural creatures.
Diverse and Horrible Powers: Beholders come in a bewildering variety,
and many that escape the Far Realm emerge into the world altered by the
passage. Each beholder projects a number of supernatural powers through
its eyes, but the specific details and arrangement of those powers vary by
beholder variety. Worse, the powers can change and improve over time, so
that as a beholder grows older, it becomes more fearsome.
H I . . . . I F . . . K I V
Ruled by Few: The only certainty when dealing with beholders is that they
possess malignant intent and a desire for dominance. Indeed, beholders rarely
tolerate subservience to other beings, and they shun the company of their own
kind. When beholders work together or do the bidding of a more powerful
master, the world is in peril.
Beholders serve only those creatures that they fear and from which they
cannot escape. Formidable titans, mighty dragons, and legendary spellcasters
can sometimes command a beholder's allegiance, but these would-be
lords must be cautious of betrayal. As deceitful as it is malign, a beholder will
submit to the authority of a strong leader if it believes it can one day claim that
creature's power.
Masters of Many: Beholders believe that they deserve to rule all they see.
Lesser beings that show obedience to these hungry and unpredictable horrors
can find a place—albeit not a safe one-in their service. Beholders accept all
manner of creatures as their attendants, lackeys, and minions. Such slaves must
frequently prove themselves valuable, lest their masters decide that they would
make better meals than they do servants.
B e h o l d e r G a u t h Level 5 E l i t e A r t i l l e ry
Medium aberrant magical beast XP 400
HP 102: Bloodied 51 Initiative+4
AC 17, Fortitude 16, Reflex 18, W i l l 19 Perception +10
Speed 0, fly 6 (hover) All-around vision, darkvision
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
Ail-Around Vision
Enemies can't gain combat advantage by flanking the gauth.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d4 + 5 damage.
^ Eye Rays • At-Will
Effect: The gauth uses two eye ray powers chosen from the list below. Each eye ray must target a
different creature. Using eye rays does not provoke opportunity attacks.
1. Fire Roy (fire): Ranged 8; +10 vs. Reflex; 2d6 + 6 fire damage.
2. Exhaustion Ray (necrotic): Ranged 8; +10 vs. Fortitude; 1d8 + 4 necrotic damage, and the
target is weakened (save ends).
3. Sleep Ray (charm): Ranged 8; +10 vs. Fortitude; the target is slowed (save ends).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is knocked unconscious instead of slowed (save ends).
4. Telekinesis Ray: Ranged 8; +10 vs. Fortitude; the gauth slides the target up to 4 squares.
MINOR ACTIONS
© Central Eye • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +10 vs. Will
Hit: the target is immobilized until the end ofthe gauth's next turn.
Str 12 () 3) Dex 15 (+4) Wis 16 (+5)
Con 15 (+4) Int 18 (+6) Cha 20 (+7)
Alignment evil Languages Deep Speech
TRAITS
B e h o l d e r
Large aberrant magical beast
Level 9 S o l o A r t i l l e ry
XP 2,000
H P 392; Bloodied 196 Initiative +9
AC 23, Fortitude 21, Reflex 22, W i l l 22 Perception +11
Speed 0, fly 4 (hover) All-around vision, darkvision f
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
Ail-Around Vision
Enemies can't gain combat advantage by flanking the beholder.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); 14 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 8 damage.
>T Eye Rays • At-Will
Effect: The beholder uses two ofthe following eye rays, using each against a different target. This
attack does not provoke opportunity attacks.
1. Charm Ray (charm): Ranged 10; +14 vs. Will; the target is dominated until the end of its
next turn.
2. Wounding Ray (necrotic): Ranged 10; +14 vs. Fortitude; 2d10 + 6 necrotic damage.
3. Sleep Ray (charm): Ranged 10; +14 vs. Will; the target is immobilized (save ends).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is knocked unconscious instead of immobilized
(save ends).
4. Telekinesis Ray: Ranged 10; +14 vs. Fortitude; the beholder slides the target up to 4 squares.
5. Slowing Ray (necrotic): Ranged 10; +14 vs. Reflex; 3d6 + 5 necrotic damage, and the target
is slowed (save ends).
6. Brilliant Ray (radiant): Ranged 10; +14 vs. Will; 1d6 + 5 radiant damage, and the target is
blinded (save ends).
7. Terror Ray (fear, psychic): Ranged 10; +14 vs. Will; 2d8 + 5 psychic damage, and the
beholder pushes the target its speed.
8. Petrifying Ray: Ranged 10; +14 vs. Fortitude; the target is petrified (save ends).
Aftereffect: The target is immobilized (save ends).
9. Death Ray (necrotic): Ranged 10; +14 vs. Fortitude; 2d8 + 10 necrotic damage. If the target
is bloodied before or after the attack, it is also dazed (save ends).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is dazed and weakened (save ends both).
Second Failed Saving Throw: The target dies.
10. Disintegrate Ray: Ranged 10; +14 vs. Fortitude; 1d8 + 5 damage, and ongoing 10 damage
(save ends).
•f Eye Ray Fren/y • Recharge i
Requirement: The beholder must be bloodied.
Effect: As eye rays above, except the beholder makes three eye ray attacks.
MINOR ACTIONS
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<- Central Eye • At-Will (1/round)
Attack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +12 vs. Will
Hit: The target cannot use encounter or daily attack powers until the end of its next turn.
Random Eye Ray • At-Will
Trigger: The beholder is conscious and an enemy starts its turn within 5 squares of it.
Effect (No Action): The beholder uses one random eye ray against the triggering enemy.
Str 18 (+8) Dex 20 (+9) Wis 15 (+6)
Con 18 (+8) Int 19 (+8) Cha 20 (+9)
Alignment evil Languages Deep Speech
B e h o l d e r Eye T y r a n t Level 19 S o l o A r t i l l e ry
Large aberrant magical beast XP 12,000 /
HP 720: Bloodied 360 Initiative+16
AC 33, Fortitude 29, Reflex 31, W i l l 33 Perception+17 |
Speed 0, fly 4 (hover) All-around vision, darkvision t
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
Ail-Around Vision
Enemies can't gain combat advantage by flanking the beholder.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +24 vs. AC
Hit: 4d8 + 7 damage.
>f Eye Rays • At-Will
Effect: The beholder uses two of the following eye rays, using each against a different target. This
attack does not provoke opportunity attacks.
1. Searing Ray (radiant): Ranged 10;+24 vs. Reflex; 3d10+ 11 radiant damage.
2. Withering Ray (necrotic): Ranged 10; +24 vs. Fortitude; 2d8 + 9 damage, and ongoing 10
necrotic damage (save ends).
3. Sleep Ray (charm): Ranged 10; +24 vs. Will; the target falls unconscious (save ends).
4. Telekinesis Ray: Ranged 10; +24 vs. Fortitude; the beholder slides the target up to 4 squares.
5. Hold Ray: Ranged 10; +24 vs. Reflex; the target is restrained (save ends).
6. Confusion Ray (charm): Ranged 10; +24 vs. Will; the target uses a free action to charge the
nearest ally it is able to charge.
7. Terror Ray (fear, psychic): Ranged 10; +24 vs. Will; 2d12 + 8 psychic damage, and the target
moves its speed as a free action. If it does not end this movement at least 4 squares farther
from the beholder than it began, the target takes 2d12 + 8 psychic damage.
8. Petrifying Ray: Ranged 10; +24 vs. Fortitude; the target is slowed (save ends).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is immobilized instead of slowed (save ends).
Second Failed Saving Throw: The target is petrified.
9. Death Ray (necrotic): Ranged 10; +24 vs. Fortitude; 4d10 + 6 necrotic damage. If the target
is bloodied before or after the attack, it is also dazed (save ends).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is dazed and weakened (save ends both).
Second Failed Saving Throw: The target dies.
10. Disintegrate Ray: Ranged 10; +24 vs. Fortitude; 2d10 + 9 damage, and ongoing 2d20
damage (save ends),
••y Eye Ray Frenzy • Recharge (i :j
Requirement: The beholder must be bloodied.
Effect: As eye rays above, except the eye tyrant makes four eye ray attacks.
MINOR ACTIONS
<- Central Eye • At-Will (1/round)
Al tack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +22 vs. Will
I lit: The target cannot use encounter or daily attack powers until the end of its next turn.
IUICGERED ACTIONS
•V Random Eye Ray • At-Will
I rigger: The beholder is conscious and an enemy starts its turn within 5 squares of it.
I //c( I (No Action): The beholder uses one random eye ray against the triggering enemy.
Str 18 (+13) Dex 24 (+16) Wis17(+12)
Con 70 (+14) Int 22 (+15) Cha 28 (+18)
Alignment evil Languages Deep Speech
m i m i ni l 7 7 i i
BULETTE
An approaching furrow of rock and soil signals the arrival of a bulette. These massive,
plated beasts spring from the ground and devour any fleshy creature they find.
Bulettes can appear anywhere and are always unwelcome. They move through
earth the way a shark moves through water and pop up from the ground to
attack. This behavior has earned them the nickname "land shark." Many people
talk about land sharks as if they were mythical, but wiser heads realize that the
creatures are real—and extremely dangerous. When signs of a bulette appear
near a community, its leaders order the population to pull up stakes and relocate.
A bulette's thick armor plates let it shrug off attacks until it eats the attacker.
This vaunted toughness gives land sharks a reputation as monsters that cannot
be slain. Villagers who encounter one of these creatures without realizing its true
nature might spread tales of an indestructible beast, a deadly creature made of
stone, or a calamitous machine.
Bulettes live in burrows and underground caverns, and explorers of such
areas might encounter the creatures there. Travelers might also run afoul of a
bulette while it moves to new territory after exhausting all the resources of its
former home. Land sharks rarely travel in groups, though sometimes a mated
pair shares the same territory. These pairs eat for two, so they move from place to
place more quickly than a single bulette would.
Stupid, Mean, and Fearless: It's easy to trick a bulette, and intelligent beings
find clever ways to guide the monsters into areas they want to have destroyed.
One ofthe few constants in the world is that a land shark will always want more
food and will take the most direct route to get it. Although a bulette hunts when
it's hungry, it might happen upon prey just after eating. This situation can bring
out the beast's mean streak as it plays with its food by physically maiding or stalking
and terrorizing the victim. To a land shark, any creature smaller than itself
is prey (and anything the same size or larger is probably an enemy). As far as a
bulette knows, smaller creatures can't harm it, so it doesn't hesitate to jump into
battle and go straight after whatever it wants to eat.
Y o u n g B u l e t te
Medium natural beast
Level 7 L u r k e r A ^ j S^
HP 68; Bloodied 34 Initiative +11
AC 21, Fortitude 20, Reflex 19, W i l l 16 Perception +6
Speed 6, burrow 6 Darkvision, tremorsense 20
Ground Eruption
The squares of ground the bulette burrows into or emerges from become difficult terrain until
the end ofthe encounter.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 4 damage.
Submerge in Earth • At-Will
Requirement: The bulette must be aboveground.
Effect: The bulette shifts 1 square and then burrows up to its burrow speed,
j- Snappingjaws • Recharge when the bulette uses submerge in earth
Requirement: The bulette must be underground.
Effect: The bulette burrows up to its burrow speed to a square aboveground. This movement
does not provoke opportunity attacks. When it first enters a square aboveground during this
movement, it makes the following attack.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 4d10 + 8 damage.
Str 22 (+9) Dex 18 (+7)
Con 20 (+8) Int 2 (-1)
Alignment unaligned Languages
W i s 16 (+6)
Cha 8 (+2)
Eat First and Think Later: A bulette doesn't have much of a brain and is led
around by its stomach. Once the creature finds a hunting ground, it devours any
animal life living there. Ranch lands, fertile forest glades, and small communities
become wastelands after land sharks move in. Only after an area has been devastated
does a bulette move on to find a new territory. Since the beasts devour their
victims entirely, leaving no bones behind, the most telling signs of a bulettes
presence are uprooted trees, recent landslides, and wide furrows in the earth.
An old wives' tale says that land sharks refuse to eat elves. Although this claim
isn't true, a bulette might pass by an elf if a human or halfling can be obtained
just as easily.
Wild Cards in Battle: The activity and noise of combat might draw a bulette
from its subterranean burrow. When a land shark enters a battle, it usually joins
as an independent combatant rather than taking one side or the other. Thus,
all factions in a conflict might be devastated by a bulette moving through their
ranks, gobbling up members of both sides. One group might be able to outsmart
the hungry beast by maneuvering so that members ofthe other group become
easier targets. However, there's no guarantee that a bulette won't continue eating
the remaining warriors after one side has been eliminated.
ri
TRAITS
Notoriously difficult to tame, bulettes rarely serve as subordinates to other
creatures. Sometimes, those that have powerful mental abilities (such as mind
flayers) can control land sharks, and brutal creatures (especially yuan-ti and hobgoblins)
can condition bulettes into obedience with years of torture. The lives of
many handlers are sacrificed in the process.
B u l e t te L e v e l 9 E l i t e S k i r m i s h er j
Large natural beast XP 800 J ,
H P 200; Bloodied 100 Initiative +10
AC 24, Fortitude 22, Reflex 20, W i l l 19 Perception +7
Speed 6, burrow 6 Darkvision, tremorsense 20
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
Ground Eruption
The squares of ground the bulette burrows into or emerges from
become difficult terrain until the end of the encounter.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 7 damage, or 5d6 + 7 against a prone target.
+ Leaping Bite • At-Will
Effect: The bulette jumps up to 5 squares and then uses bite. This movement does not provoke
opportunity attacks.
<• Rising Burst • At-Will
Requirement: The bulette must be underground.
Effect: The bulette moves up to its speed to a square aboveground. This movement does not
provoke opportunity attacks. W h e n it first enters a square aboveground during this movement,
it makes the following attack.
Attack: Close burst 2 (creatures in the burst); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 5 damage.
Miss: Half damage.
MOVE ACTIONS
•1 Earth Furrow • At-Will
Effect: The bulette burrows up to its speed at a depth of 1 square beneath the surface of the
ground. This movement does not provoke opportunity attacks. Each time it moves beneath
an enemy space for the first time during the movement, it makes the following attack against
that enemy.
Attack: Melee 1; +12 vs. Fortitude.
Hit: The target falls prone.
Skills Athletics +15, Endurance +14
Str 22 (+10) Dex 18 (+8) Wis 16 (+7)
Con 20 (+9) Int 2 (+0) Cha 8 (+3)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
{ ( ) 1 AlimMi'i" /
TRAITS
Ground Eruption
The squares of ground the bulette burrows into or emerges
from become difficult terrain until the end ofthe encounter.
mrnmm
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 10 damage, or 5d10 + 10 against a prone target.
Leaping Bite • At-Will
Effect: The bulette jumps up to 7 squares and can use bite at any point during the movement.
This movement does not provoke opportunity attacks.
<* Rising Burst • At-Will
Requirement: The bulette must be underground.
Effect: The bulette moves up to its speed to a square aboveground. This movement does not pro
voke opportunity attacks. When it first enters a square aboveground during this movement, it
makes the following attack.
Attack: Close burst 3 (creatures in the burst); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 10 damage.
Miss: Half damage.
te
I beast
Level 18 E l i t e Sk
HP 350; Bloodied 175 Initiative +17
AC 33, Fortitude 31, Reflex 29, W i l l 28 Perception +14
Speed 8, burrow 8 Darkvision, tremorsense 20
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
MOVE ACTIONS
I Earth Furrow • At-Will
Effect: The bulette burrows up to its speed at a depth of 1 square beneath the surface ofthe
ground. This movement does not provoke opportunity attacks. Each time it moves beneath
an enemy space for the first time during the movement, it makes the following attack against
that enemy.
Attack: Melee 1; +21 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The target falls prone.
Skills Athletics +22, Endurance +20
Str 26 (+17) Dex 22 (+15) W i s 20 (+14)
Con 23 (+15) Int 5 (+6) Cha 10 (+9)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
"It's called a land shark for a reason, and it's
about the fin on its back."
—Kathra, wizard
not just
of Haven
7 ^ / 11
CARRION CRAWLER
Wriggling like giant, loathsome caterpillars, these aggressive beasts attack anything
llnil invades their territory or disturbs their/easting on the dead. The crawlers paralyze
victims with their tentacles before dragging the prey off to expire and rot.
Foul things feed on filth, and so it is that carrion crawlers squirm through all
manner of death, rot, and offal. These bizarre creatures lurk in moist and dark
places, seeking to scour putrid flesh from carcasses and gobble the slimy bones
that remain.
Carrion Eaters: Like vultures, carrion crawlers follow the scent of death
to their food. However, if they must travel great distances, it's likely that their
intended meal will have been claimed by other scavengers by the time they
arrive. Thus, carrion crawlers hunker down in territories where food is plentiful
and other carrion-eaters have limited mobility. Caves, sewers, dungeons,
and heavily forested marshes work best, but carrion crawlers are also drawn to
battlefields and cemeteries. Woe to the city that has these monsters in its sewers
in a time of siege or plague. In such places, a carrion crawler roams on the hunt,
its tentacles feeling the air for the smell of blood or decay. Within structures, the
repulsive creatures often scurry across the ceiling as they move toward food. In
this way, they avoid contact with other dangerous inhabitants of the darkness,
such as oozes and otyughs, and they can surprise trespassers who don't think
to look up.
L e v e l 5 S k i r m i s h er
XP 200
Initiative +5
Perception +3
Darkvision
C a r r i o n C r a w l e r S c u t t l er
Large aberrant beast
HP 63; Bloodied 31
AC 19, Fortitude 18, Reflex 16, W i l l 17
Speed 8, climb 8 (spider climb)
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage, or 3d8 + 4 against a stunned target.
+ Tentacles • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +8 vs. Fortitude, or +10 vs. Fortitude
against a prone target
Hit: The target is stunned (save ends). The carrion crawler shifts up to its speed, pulling the
target with it.
MOVE ACTIONS
+ Unsettling Scuttle • At-Will
Effect: The carrion crawler shifts up to its speed. It can move through enemy spaces and climb
during the shift. Each time the carrion crawler enters an enemy space for the first time during
this movement, it makes the following attack against that enemy.
Attack: Melee 0; +8 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target falls prone.
Str 18 (+6) Dex 13 (+3) Wis 12 (+3)
Con 15 (+4) Int 2 (-2) Cha 14 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
N> "• \
TRAITS
© Tentacles (poison) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +10 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d4 + 5 damage, and the target takes ongoing 5 poison
damage and is slowed (save ends both).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is immobilized instead of slowed
(save ends).
Second Failed Saving Throw: The target is stunned instead of immobilized (save ends).
Miss: The target is slowed until the end of the carrion crawler's next turn.
I Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 +4 damage.
Str 20 (+8) Dex 16 (+6) Wis 14 (+5)
Con 17 (+6) Int 2 (-1) Cha 16 (+6)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
C a r r i o n C r a w l e r P u t r e f i er
Large aberrant beast
HP 148; Bloodied 74
AC 31, Fortitude 28, Reflex 26, W i l l 25
Speed 6, climb 6 (spider climb)
Level 15 S o l d i er
XP 1,200
Initiative +13
Perception +9 J
Darkvision 9
O Nauseous Stench (poison) • Aura 3
Any enemy that starts its turn in the aura takes 5 poison damage
and is slowed (save ends both).
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Rotting Tentacles (necrotic) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +18 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d10 + 6 necrotic damage, the carrion crawler can pull the target 1 square, and the target is
immobilized (save ends). If the target was already immobilized, it is instead stunned and takes
ongoing 10 necrotic damage (save ends both).
+ Bite • At Will
Aftack: Melee 1 (one creature); +20 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 10 damage.
Sir 23 (+13) Dex 18 (+11)
Con 20 (+12) Int 2 (+3)
Alignment unaligned Languages —
W i s 14 (+9)
Cha 16 (+10)
Patient Predators: Carrion crawlers eat rotting flesh, but they don't always
wait for a creature to die on its own. Despite their great size and poor instinct
for stealth, crawlers can ambush victims by waiting around blind corners (or
prey to come to them. Since crawlers tend to live in subterranean darkness or
hunt at night on the surface, light signals a potential meal, and a carrion crawler
might follow a light source from a distance for hours, hoping to pick up the scent
of blood. —
C a r r i o n C r a w l er
Large aberrant beast
HP 81; Bloodied 40
AC 23, Fortitude 19, Reflex 18, W i l l 17
Speed 6, climb 6 (spider climb)
Level 7 S o l d i er
XP 300
Initiative +8
Perception +5
Darkvision
STANDARD ACTIONS
r" CAI<KIONU<AWII I< F 33
When facing potential prey or intruders, a carrion crawler prefers to let its
poison do the work. The beast strikes as many enemies as it can with its tentacles
and saves its bite for poisoned foes who get too close lor comfort. Once a
victim becomes rigid with paralysis, the carrion crawler wraps it in tentacles
and drags it away to a secure eating area, such as a high ledge or a hole in a wall.
The crawler then looms over its meal and watches for signs of life, striking with a
tentacle if it sees any. When the crawler believes the prey to be dead, it coats the
victim's flesh with toxic saliva to disguise the stench as the corpse decays, and
then it resumes patrolling its territory while waiting for the meal to ripen.
Horrors from Beyond: It has been suggested that a wizard's mad experi
ment gave birth to the first carrion crawlers. A wizard did introduce the revolting
beasts to the world, but they were not created in a laboratory. A spcllcaster whose
name is lost to history opened a connection to the Far Realm in the hope of
learning that plane's secrets. Her irresponsible act resulted in the slaughter
of everyone in her city. Carrion crawlers were not the worst horrors to cross the
bridge between dimensions that day—they came to devour those that other fell
beings had already slain or driven mad. Since that ancient time, carrion crawlers
have spread throughout the world, and they continue to cross over from the Far
Realm whenever fools gain the power to breach that disturbing plane.
Foul Pets: Although they are wild and territorial, carrion crawlers can
sometimes be manipulated or brought to heel. Kobolds, for example, leave offerings
of rotten meat in particular tunnels, encouraging the crawlers to stake out
a territory that acts as a buffer to the kobolds' lair. Goblins and similar creatures
attempt to raise carrion crawlers and coach them for battle. The venom
of young crawlers is too weak to paralyze prey, so they can be domesticated
(after a fashion) and used as guard beasts. Some creatures train carrion crawlers
as mounts, although riders must employ tentacle harnesses to keep from
being paralyzed.
E n o r m o u s C a r r i o n C r a w l e r Level 17 E l i t e S o l d i er
Huge aberrant beast XP 3,200
HP 332; Bloodied 166 Initiative +14
AC 33, Fortitude 31, Reflex 30, W i l l 29 Perception +11
Speed 6, climb 6 (spider climb) Darkvision
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
m M s ^ ^ <his ring fo
Threatening Reach
The carrion crawler can make opportunity attacks against
enemies within 3 squares of it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Tentacles (poison) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +20 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d6 + 8 damage, the carrion crawler can pull the target 1 square,
and the target takes ongoing 10 poison damage and is slowed (save ends both).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is immobilized instead of slowed (save ends).
Second Failed Saving Throw: The target is stunned instead of immobilized (save ends).
4 Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 12 damage.
4 Hungry Assault • At-Will
Effect: The carrion crawler uses tentacles twice or uses tentacles once and bite once.
<$> Tentacle Flurry (poison) • Recharge when first bloodied
Attack: Close blast 3 (creatures in the blast); 20 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d10 + 5 damage, and the target takes ongoing 10 poison damage and is slowed (save ends
both).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is immobilized instead of slowed (save ends).
Second Failed Saving Throw: The target is stunned instead of immobilized (save ends).
Str 25 (+15) Dex 18 (+12) Wis 16 (+11)
Con 22 (+14) Int 4 (+5) Cha 18 (+12)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
CYCLOPS
A towering giant with a single, evil eye, a cyclops is a creature of the Feywild-and a dangerous
enemy. Cyclopses serve fomorians as soldiers and artisans, and they possess many
of the same supernatural powers as their dark masters, combining physical might with
magical ability.
MINOR ACTIONS
TRAITS
Cyclops C r u s h er
Large fey humanoid
STANDARD ACTIONS
Similar to the giants of the world, cyclopses act as bodyguards, enforcers, and
foot soldiers for the tyrannical subterranean giants known as fomorians. Primarily
found in the Feywild, cyclopses are thought to have originated as an echo of
the world's ogres. Soon after the birth of their race, they came under the influence
of the fomorians, who not only molded the cyclopscs to suit their needs but
also gifted them with the ability to master the evil eye. Since those ancient times,
a nigh-unbreakable pact has existed between the fomorians and the cyclopses,
creating a mighty force of giant creatures that terrorize denizens of the Feywild
and the world alike. Despite this alliance, cyclopses are not as evil and depraved
as their masters. They unfailingly honor their covenant as a matter of ritual and
tradition, not out of any real pleasure in the acts they are ordered to undertake.
Loyal Servants: The cyclopses are the only allies that the fomorians trust
completely. All others are considered prone to deception and betrayal. For a
cyclops, honoring alliances and pacts is one of the most important requirements
HP 171; Bloodied 85 Initiative+12
AC 26, Fortitude 27, Reflex 26, W i l l 25 Perception +16
Speed 8
Evil Eye • At-Will (1/round)
Effect: Ranged sight (one enemy). The target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls and all defenses
until the end of the encounter or until the cyclops uses this power again.
Skills Athletics +18
Str 23 (+13) Dex 20 (+12) Wis 19 (+11)
Con 21 (+12) Int 10 (+7) Cha 11 (+7)
Alignment unaligned Languages Elven
Equipment scale armor, greatclub
Level 14 B r u te
XP 1.000
Truesight
The cyclops can see invisible creatures and objects.
© Spiked Greatclub (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 3d12 + 8 damage,
•f Tremor Smash (weapon) • Recharge (Xj ::
Attack: Close blast 2 (enemies in the blast); 19 vs. AC
Hit: 5d12 + 12 damage, and the target falls prone.
Hi 1 AimiW. / s ,1 /
(Left to right) cyclops crusher, eye lops rambler
of life. Once cyclopses have declared allegiance to a particular group, their
dedication to maintaining that bond never falters in the face of adversity. Only
outright betrayal could spur a cyclops to alter its allegiances. The race has
remained steadfast allies ofthe fomorians since the dawn of time, even though
the latter are reckless with the lives of their cyclops servants. The fomorians
view this loyalty as a great strength, but it could be exploited and turned into a
weakness by their enemies. If anyone managed to charm cyclopses or turn them
against their dark masters, the Feywild might be thrown into chaos. Fomorians
would look upon their trusted warriors with suspicion, and any cyclopses close to
t lieir masters could wreak terrible damage before being stopped.
Impressive Artisans: Cyclopses have a natural affinity for crafting, in particular
the creation of magic items. Their reputation as highly skilled artisans
extends well beyond the Feywild, and many sages and artificers in the world
know that some ofthe most impressive magic devices, weapons, and armor
come from cyclops forges. Meticulous workers toil endlessly to create interesting,
beautiful, and powerful magic objects as tributes to their fomorian masters.
In fact, their labor takes on a competitive element when cyclops tribes compete
to see which one can produce the most lavish and impressive tributes. A cyclops
art isan values quality above all else, and rather than crank out a large quantity
ol Objects, he or she prefers to create one item at a time—something that is both
remarkable and useful, such as a shield that can turn away a dragon's breath or a
crown that can read the thoughts of others.
Level 14 M i n i o n B r u te
XP 250
Cyclops G u a rd
Large fey humanoid
STANDARD ACTIONS
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Cyclops R a m b l er
Large fey humanoid
L e v e l 14 S k i r m i s h er
XP 1,000
TRAITS
STANDARD ACTIONS
MINOR ACTIONS
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +10
AC 26, Fortitude 28, Reflex 25, W i l l 25 Perception +15
Speed 6
© Battleaxe (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 14 damage.
Trigger: An enemy misses the cyclops with a melee attack.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The cyclops uses battleaxe against the triggering enemy.
Alignment unaligned Languages Elven
Equipment hide armor, heavy shield, battleaxe
HP 141; Bloodied 70
AC 28, Fortitude 28, Reflex 25, W i l l 26
Speed 8
Initiative+12 £
Perception +16 s
Truesight
The cyclops can see invisible creatures and objects.
© Greatsword (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 9 damage.
4 Bounding Charge (weapon) • Encounter
Effect:; Before and after the attack, the cyclops shifts up to 3 squares.
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 4d12 + 7 damage.
Miss: Half damage.
Evil Eye • At-Will (1/round)
Effect: Ranged sight (one enemy). The target is affected by the cyclops's evil eye until the end
ofthe encounter or until the cyclops uses this power again. While adjacent to the target, the
cyclops can shift 1 extra square whenever it shifts.
Feywild Alacrity • Recharge jl
Trigger: The cyclops hits a creature affected by its evil eye.
Effect (Free Action): The cyclops gains an extra move action that must be used before the end of
its turn.
Alignment unaligned
Equipment chainmail, greatsword
Monsters A-'/.
Cyclops H e w er
Large fey humanoid
HP 158; Bloodied 79
AC 32, Fortitude 31, Reflex 27, W i l l 29
Speed 8
TRAITS
Truesight
The cyclops can see invisible
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Battleaxe (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +21 vs.
Hit: 2d12 + 11 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Evil Eye • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy the cyclops can see misses one of the cyclops's allies with a melee attack.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The cyclops uses battleaxe against the triggering enemy. In addition,
until the end of the encounter or until the cyclops uses this power again, whenever the triggering
enemy moves more than 2 squares away from the cyclops, the cyclops can shift 1 square
closer to the target as an immediate reaction.
Str 25 (+15) Dex 16 (+11) Wis 19 (+12)
Con 22 (+14) Int 10 (+8) Cha 12 (+9)
Alignment unaligned Languages Elven
Equipment chainmail, light shield, battleaxe
Masters of the Evil Eye: The single, central eye of a cyclops-known as the
evil eye—is just as dangerous as the creature's weapons. The eye serves as a focus
of magical power that can hinder
"Trust me, there's nothing
wrong with its vision for
only having one eye. And
you don't want to meet its
gaze."
—Adrin of Tiri Kitor
enemies and open them up to attack.
The cyclopses owe their mastery of the
evil eye to their fomorian allies, who
have similar abilities, and some cyclopses
develop different uses for this
distinctive power. Many humanoid
cultures have superstitions about the
concept of the evil eye. Some invoke
their version of an "evil eye" to place a
curse on those who have wronged
them, and others scrawl the image of
an eye on the doors of their enemies' homes, hoping to draw misfortune down
upon them. This tradition is based on a tale told by eladrin elders that, in ancient
times, drow that had made a pact with a cyclops tribe would inscribe an arcane
rune on the walls of certain dwellings to indicate where the cyclopses were supposed
to attack. According to the tale, the cyclopses could attune their evil eyes to
this rune, allowing them to see their targets (and put them under the effect of
those evil eyes) before launching their assault.
LYCLUL'S I J9
DEATH KNIGHT
Among the most powerful of undead humanoids, death knights are warriors who chose
to embrace undeath rather than pass on to the afterlife. They bind their souls into their
weapons, fueling their necrotic powers as they marshal armies of undead.
A death knight wields fear like a weapon. It charges forward at the head of vast
undead armies, shattering the courage of defenders. Gifted with undeath as a
result of a ritual, a death knight is like the martial equivalent of a lich. In death,
it retains its sentience and skill and gains the ability to shrug off wounds that
would slay most mortals. A humanoid becomes a death knight through a profane
ritual that strips away the emotional bonds of one's life, replacing them with
cruelty and a perverse sense of honor. This ritual is often bestowed as a gift from
high-ranking followers of Orcus, the Demon Prince of the Undead. When a
warrior reaches a certain state of notoriety, Orcus's adherents approach the individual
and try to tempt him or her with the promise of immortality. A warrior
who accepts the offer turns into a dark
reflection in the shattered mirror of
undeath. Its armor becomes blackened
and scarred, and its flesh becomes as
withered and twisted as the
person's corrupted sold.
Martial Champions:
In life, most death
knights were soldiers
or warriors
of great martial
prowess, typically
commanders or
leaders who guided
their people to many
victories. In death,
these warriors
gain the strength
and speed to match
any living champion.
A death knight
can fight
long after a
mortal would
have died. This
characteristic
allows a death
knight to take
on suicidal
4 0 in sir rs A-/.
tasks, such as kidnapping a nobleman from a fortress. A death knight succeeds
because it can ignore the arrows jutting from its body and can swat aside the
swords of defenders. A death knight retains some of its personality from its
former life, but its sense of honor becomes twisted in death. The creature might
challenge an enemy commander to a duel rather than engaging in a pitched
battle. The result of such a duel is almost always the death ofthe challenged foe.
Alternatively, a death knight might give civilians time to clear out of a battle zone
before marching its undead legions across the land, slaughtering any who stand
against it.
Leaders ofthe Undead: A death knight often leads at the head of a column
of undead, acting as an officer or a general for undisciplined undead, such as
zombies and skeletons. Under a death knight's leadership, undead fight more
efficiently and with greater skill. A death knight has magical talents of command
as well as natural leadership. Strong-willed undead, such as vampires and liches,
can resist a death knight's authority. These undead sometimes choose to work
with a death knight, though. Slaying a death knight reduces the effectiveness of
nearby undead, so an army facing a legion of skeletons or zombies might hire a
group of mercenaries or assassins to take out a death knight before a large-scale
assault begins.
"How does it feel, my dear, to know that you have brought
pleasure to the damned? You have made my dreary realm
of death interesting. Would that I had known you as a
living man! But, my time is eternal. Perhaps I will wait for
one who can share my throne."
—Lord Soth
Soul Weapons: The ritual that transforms a warrior into a death knight binds
part ofthe subject's soul to one of his or her weapons. This weapon is not only a
symbol of an individual's transformation, it is also the source of a death knight's
power. A death knight jealously guards its soul weapon; humanoids sometimes
try to steal this weapon, holding it for ransom or using it as leverage to bend
a knight to their will. A death knight always keeps its soul weapon close, and
such weapons are rarely left unattended. When a death knight is destroyed, its
soul weapon crumbles to dust. A particularly powerful death knight could leave
behind a mighty weapon that remains infused with part of the knight's soul. In
such a case, the weapon might take on sentience of its own, even speaking to its
wielder. A hero who slays a death knight and claims its weapon must be cautious,
because many have been driven mad by the whispers of these weapons. Tales
even recount how some people have become possessed by the souls of destroyed
death knights.
1)I:A I 11 K N I l i l l l f
D e a t h K n i g h t Level 17 E l i t e S o l d i er
Medium natural humanoid (undead) XP 3,200
HP 324; Bloodied 162 Initiative+11
AC 33, Fortitude 31, Reflex 27, W i l l 29 Perception +8
Speed 5 Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic; Vulnerable 10 radiant
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
TRAITS
6 Marshal Undead • Aura 10
Undead allies of level 17 or lower gain a +2 power bonus to attack rolls while in the aura.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Soulsword (necrotic, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 + 12 necrotic damage.
Effect: The death knight marks the target until the end ofthe death knight's next turn.
4 Containing Strike (necrotic, weapon) • At-Will
Requirement: The death knight must be wielding a soulsword.
Attack: Melee 1 (one or two creatures); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 +12 necrotic damage, and the target is slowed until the end ofthe death knight's next
turn.
Effectlhe death knight marks the target until the end ofthe death knight's next turn.
Unholy Flames (fire, necrotic) • Recharge (M] ITU
Attack: Close burst 2 (living creatures in the burst); +20 vs. Reflex
Hit: 6d8 + 12 fire and necrotic damage.
Effect: Each undead ally in the burst deals 2d6 extra fire damage with melee attacks until the
end of the death knight's next turn.
4 Warrior's Challenge (necrotic, weapon) • Encounter
Requirement: The death knight must be wielding a soulsword.
Attack: Melee 1 (one or two creatures); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 4d8 + 19 necrotic damage, and the death knight pushes the target up to 2 squares. The
death knight marks each enemy within 2 squares ofthe target until the end ofthe death
knight's next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Combat Challenge • At-Will
Trigger. An enemy adjacent to and marked by the death knight shifts or makes an attack that
doesn't include it as a target.
Effect (Opportunity Action): The death knight uses soulsword against the triggering enemy.
Implacable • At-Will
Trigger: The death knight becomes marked, slowed, immobilized, dazed, or stunned by an effect.
Effect (Opportunity Action): The death knight makes a saving throw to end the triggering effect,
even if the effect would not normally end on a save.
Str 20 (+13) Dex 12 (+9) Wis 11 (+8)
Con 18 (+12) Int 13 (+9) Cha14(+10)
Alignment evil Languages Common
Equipment plate armor, heavy shield
1 } \ M i i m l n i /\ / 1
D e a t h K n i g h t B l a c k g u a r d Level 18 E l i t e S k i r m i s h e r /V:
Medium natural humanoid (undead) XP 4,000 / fitf
HP 338; Bloodied 169 Initiative+17
AC 32, Fortitude 31, Reflex 29, W i l l 27 Perception +10
Speed 6 Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic; Vulnerable 10 radiant
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
mm
O Slayer of the Living (fear) • Aura 3
Whenever an enemy ends its turn in the aura, the death knight slides that enemy up to 3 squares.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Soulsword (necrotic, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 9 necrotic damage.
Effect: The death knight shifts up to 2 squares.
| Double Strike • At-Will
Requirement: The death knight must be wielding a soulsword.
Effect: The death knight uses soulsword twice, making each attack against a different enemy.
I Overpowering Attack (necrotic, weapon) • At-Will
Requirement: The death knight must be wielding a soulsword.
Attack: Melee 1 (one or two creatures); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 9 necrotic damage, and the death knight slides the target up to 2 squares.
Abyssal Blast (fire, necrotic) • Encounter
Attack: Close burst 5 (enemies in the burst); +21 vs. Reflex
Hit: 5d6 + 13 fire and necrotic damage.
Miss: Half damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
Chilling Glare (fear) • R e c h a r g e ®®
Effect: Close burst 5 (one enemy in the burst). The target grants combat advantage until the end
of the death knight's next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Implacable • At-Will
Trigger: The death knight becomes marked, slowed, immobilized, dazed, or stunned by an effect.
Effect (Opportunity Action): The death knight makes a saving throw to end the triggering effect,
even if the effect would not normally end on a save.
Str 24 (+16) Dex 22 (+15) Wis 13 (+10)
Con 17 (+12) Int 14 (+11) Cha 20 (+14)
Alignment evil Languages Common
Equipment plate armor, light shield
"I have had centuries to reflect on my sins. They are all
that sustain me."
—Kalaban, death knight of Nerath
N I A I n K N K I 1 1 1 / 1 t
DEMON
The monstrous demons spill out from the Abyss, spreading violence and destruction with
every step they take. They tear down the strong, devour the weak, and despoil anything
they touch with absolute evil.
The hateful agents of chaos known as demons come in a multitude of forms, each
perverse and horrific. Their abilities and renown range from the stench of the
weak, pitiful dretches to the crashing
"Summoning a demon to
help you in battle can be
very effective, but never
believe that the battle is
over when your enemies
are slain"
—Nimozaran,
Septarch of Fallcrest
lightning and consuming flames of the
immense, formidable balors. The only
constant is the all-consuming wickedness
that drives demons to slay and
destroy until they meet their inevitable
violent deaths. These fiendish creatures
will never rest until they reduce the
world to a blackened, flaming husk.
Demons' cruel impulses lead them
to go wherever they can to cause the
most pain and wreak the greatest
destruction. Some days, they might join
the raiding parties of vicious creatures
such as gnolls or minotaurs. In truly dire times, entire war bands of demons might
strike out from the Abyss, spreading like a wasting plague. Their armies (if these
disorganized forces can truly be called such) roam from settlement to settlement,
leaving no one alive except a small number of victims that they capture and then
torture during the trip to their next destination.
Nearly everyone opposes demons, especially the fervent followers of gods and
primal spirits. The desire of these faithful stalwarts to protect the world runs
counter to the demons' need to rend it asunder. But even with so many forces
D r e t c h L a c k e y Level 12 M i n i o n B r u te
Small elemental humanoid (demon) XP 250
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion.
AC 24, Fortitude 26, Reflex 24, W i l l 22
Speed 5
Initiative +9
Perception +8
Darkvision
0 Sickening Miasma • Aura 1
Whenever an enemy in the aura takes a standard action or a move action, it takes 2 damage.
Multiple sickening miasma auras stack, dealing up to 10 damage.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Savage Claws • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 12 damage.
Str 20 (+11) Dex 17 (+9) Wis 12 (+7)
Con 16 (+9) Int 5 (+3) Cha 7 (+4)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal
4 4 1 AliiiiWt'i.i » /
B a b au
Medium elemental humanoid (demon)
Level 13 S k i r m i s h er
XP 800
TRAITS
STANDARD ACTIONS
MINOR ACTIONS
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
HP 127; Bloodied 63
AC 26, Fortitude 23, Reflex 25, W i l l 24
Speed 7
Resist 5 acid
Initiative +13
Perception +10
Darkvision
0 Protective Slime (acid) • Aura 1
Any enemy in the aura that hits the babau with a melee attack takes 5 acid damage.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 3 damage. The target also takes ongoing 5 acid damage, or ongoing 10 acid damage if
the babau is bloodied (save ends).
© Claws • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 3 damage, and the babau can shift 1 square.
-f Babau's Advantage • At Will
Effect: The babau uses bite and claws against a creature granting combat advantage to it.
Murderous Abduction (teleportation) • Recharge when the babau reduces an enemy to 0 hit
points or fewer
Effect: The babau teleports one creature adjacent to it up to 7 squares and then teleports to a
square adjacent to that creature. The creature grants combat advantage to the babau until the
end ofthe babau's next turn.
Variable Resistance • 2/Encounter
Trigger: The babau takes acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder damage.
Effect (Free Action): The babau gains resist 20 to the triggering damage type until the end ofthe
encounter or until it uses variable resistance again.
Skills Athletics +14
Str 17 (+9)
Con 15 (+8)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal
aligned against them, the demons could still win. They have nothing to lose, and
I heir numbers could be endless-no one knows how many demons exist.
Blood and Violence: Demons live only to destroy, and whatever they can't
destroy, they hate. A demon unleashed from the Abyss tears at the edifices ofthe
world and rips apart anything it can, relishing bloodshed and brutality. The creatures
have no concept of honor, mercy, or pity. The aftermath of a demon attack
displays their cruelty. They leave behind villages burned to cinders, bodies torn
limb from limb, and land forever corrupted by fiendish influence.
Abyssal Influences: The serpentine, six-armed marilith; the misshapen,
wretched dretch; the blazing, winged balor; and the gaunt, vulturelike vrock are
all evidence of how demons are warped and corrupted by their environment. An
Immeasurable number of horrific layers make up the swirling black vortex called
llie Abyss. Travelers there face not only the dangers of demons but also acidic
pools ol slime, storms of blood, and forests of razor-sharp foliage. The spreading
in M U M /
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
V r o ck
Large elemental humanoid (demon)
L e v e l 13 S k i r m i s h er
X P 8 0 0
HP 132; Bloodied 66
AC 27, Fortitude 25, Reflex 23, W i l l 23
Speed 6, fly 8
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +12
Perception +13
Darkvision
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 + 8 damage.
+ Flyby Attack • At-Will
Effect: The vrock flies up to its speed and uses claw once during that
movement. It does not provoke opportunity attacks when moving away
from the target of the attack.
<T Spores of Madness (poison) • Encounter
Trigger: The vrock is first bloodied.
Attack (Free Action): Close burst 2 (enemies in the burst); +16 vs. Will
Hit: 3d10 + 6 poison damage, and the target is dazed (save ends).
Miss: Half damage.
Variable Resistance • 2/Encounter
Trigger: The vrock takes acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder damage.
Effect (Free Action): The vrock gains resist 10 to the triggering damage type until the end of the
encounter or until it uses variable resistance again.
Skills Bluff+15, Insight+13
Str 2 3 (+12) Dex 19 (+10) Wis 15 (+8)
Con 20 (+11) Int 12 (+7) Cha 19 (+10)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal
darkness spews corruption into the Elemental Chaos, and its malicious influence
creeps into the mortal world, bringing the demons with it.
Rule of Tooth and Claw: Enemies of all and allies of none, demons submit to
opponents only when the alternative is immediate death. The creatures have no
organized hierarchy, but the most powerful types order motley hordes of lesser
demons around. Since their greatest desire is to sow destruction, all demons
are quick to follow any orders that allow them to slaughter or raze. The mightiest
leaders are the demon lords. These immensely powerful beings—including
Demogorgon, Orcus, Baphomet, Graz'zt, Lolth, and Yeenoghu—rule layers of
the Abyss and eternally contest one another's authority. Usually, these turf wars
involve conquering places of power on other planes rather than out-and-out conflict
within the Abyss. The demon lords, unlike lesser demons, do have goals.
Many of them share a thirst for deicide, eager to murder the gods that created the
world the demons so fervently hate.
Summoning: Demons have such fearsome power that ambitious and evil
mortals desire to use it for their own ends. They summon and bind demons with
dark rituals, using the captive creatures as slaves or stripping away their elemental
essence to fuel other magical endeavors. Few summoners truly understand
the nature of the diabolical forces they seek to conquer, and demons frequently
escape these would-be masters or use the magical conduit to bring more abyssal
spawn into the world.
Maniltri A z
A b y s s a l E v i s c e r a t or Level 14 B r u te
Medium elemental humanoid (demon) XP 1,000 /
HP 173; Bloodied 86 Initiative +10 i f
AC 26, Fortitude 28, Reflex 25, W i l l 24 Perception +9 Speed 6 \ 1
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 5 damage.
+ Grab • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. Reflex
Hit: 4d6 + 4 damage, and the eviscerator grabs the target (escape DC 21) if it has fewer than
two creatures grabbed.
MINOR ACTIONS
t Eviscerating Talons • At-Will (1/round, or 3/round while the eviscerator is bloodied)
Effect: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the eviscerator). The target takes 6 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Variable Resistance • 2/Encounter
Trigger: The eviscerator takes acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder damage.
Effect (Free Action): The eviscerator gains resist 15 to the triggering damage type until the end of
the encounter or until it uses variable resistance again.
Skills Athletics +18
Str 2 3 (+13) Dex 17 (+10) Wis 15 (+9)
Con 23 (+13) Int 7 (+5) Cha 11 (+7)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal
(Left to right) vrock, marilith, balor, hezrou
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Variable Resistance • 2/Encounter
Trigger: The hezrou takes acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder damage.
Effect (Free Action): The hezrou gains resist 20 to the triggering damage type until the end ofthe
encounter or until it uses variable resistance again.
Str 28 (+20) Dex 23 (+17) Wis 23 (+17)
Con 24 (+18) Int 8 (+10) Cha 16 (+14)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal
M a r i l i t h Level 2 4 E l i t e S k i r m i s h er
Large elemental humanoid (demon) XP 12,100 if
HP 436; Bloodied 218 Initiative +23
AC 38, Fortitude 35, Reflex 37, W i l l 35 Perception +21 § I
Speed 8 Darkvision 3 I •
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1 __ w
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Scimitar (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +29 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10+ 12 damage.
4 Shroud of Steel (weapon) • At-Will
Effect: The marilith uses scimitar twice and gains a +6 bonus to AC until the end of its turn.
4 Weapon Dance (weapon) • Recharge when first bloodied
Effect: The marilith uses scimitar six times. Each time it hits, the marilith can shift 1 square.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
H e z r ou
Large elemental humanoid (demon)
TRAITS
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Slam • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +27 vs.
Hit: 4d10 + 10 damage.
4 Bite • R e c h a r g j f g f i l f f l r f t;
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +27 vs.
Hit: 6d12 + 10 damage.
4 Hacking Blades (weapon) • At-Will
Trigger: An adjacent enemy misses the marilith with a melee attack.
Effect (Free Action): The marilith uses scimitar against the triggering enemy.
Variable Resistance • 3/Encounter
Trigger: The marilith takes acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder damage.
Effect (Free Action): The marilith gains resist 20 to the triggering damage type until the end ofthe
encounter or until it uses variable resistance again.
Skills Bluff+24, Insight +21, Intimidate +24, Stealth +26
Str 25 (+19) Dex 28 (+21) Wis 19 (+16)
Con 18 (+16) Int 14(+14) Cha24(+19)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal
Equipment 6 scimitars s A U \ .. , .
HP 254; Bloodied 127
AC 34, Fortitude 36, Reflex 33, W i l l 33
Speed 6
Initiative +17
Perception +17
Darkvision
0 Noxious Stench (poison) • Aura 2
Any enemy that makes an attack whileintheaura takes 10 poison
damage, or 20 poison damage while the hezrou is bloodied.
AC
AC
Level 2 2 B r u te
XP 4,150
B a l o r Level 27 E l i t e B r u te
Huge elemental humanoid (demon) XP 22,000
HP 622; Bloodied 311 Initiative +20 *
AC 40, Fortitude 40, Reflex 37, W i l l 39 Perception +27 f
Speed 8, fly 12 (clumsy) Blindsight 6, darkvision
Resist 20 fire
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
0 Flaming Body (fire) • Aura 2, or 3 while the balor is
bloodied
Any enemy that starts its turn in the aura takes 10 fire damage
or 20 fire damage while the balor is bloodied.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Lightning Sword (lightning, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +32 vs. AC
Hit: 6d10 + 11 lightning damage, or3d10 + 71 lightning damage if the balor scores a critical hit.
+ Flaming W h i p (fire) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 5 (one creature); +30 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d10 + 10 fire damage, and ongoing 15 fire damage (save ends). The balor pulls the target
up to 5 squares to a square adjacent to it.
4 Fire and Lightning • At-Will
Effect: The balor uses lightning sword once and flaming whip once.
•<* Beheading Blade (lightning, weapon) • Recharge when first bloodied
Attack: Close blast 3 (enemies in the blast); +32 vs. AC. The attack can score a critical hit on a
roll of 15-20.
Hit; 5d12 + 14 lightning damage, or 3d12 + 74 lightning damage if the balor scores a critical hit.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<• Death Burst (fire)
Trigger: The balor drops to 0 hit points.
Attack (No Action): Close burst 10 (creatures in the burst); +30 vs. Reflex
Hit: 6d10 fire damage.
Miss: Half damage.
Effect: The balor is destroyed.
Variable Resistance • 3/Encounter
Trigger: The balor takes acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder damage.
Effect (Free Action): The balor gains resist 20 to the triggering damage type until the end of the
encounter or until it uses variable resistance again.
Skills Bluff+20, Insight +27, Intimidate +20
Str 30 (+23) Dex 25 (+20) Wis 29 (+22)
Con 31 (+23) Int 12 (+14) Cha 14 (+15)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal, Common
Equipment lightning sword, flaming whip
"Sages once believed that only six balors existed in the
whole of the Abyss. If only that were true"
—Rhogar, paladin of Bahamut
-r r 4"9
DEVIL
Malevolent creatures from the Nine Hells, devils were once servants of the gods that
rebelled and were cast out of their domains. Devils claim mortal souls to increase their
power through temptation, betrayal, and manipulation.
Devils are infernal creatures whose once-luminous humanoid forms have been
twisted and corrupted by their exile from the domains ofthe gods they once
attended. They inhabit the burned-out husk of an astral dominion, now called
the Nine Hells, as punishment for the slaying of a god by their dark master,
Asmodeus. Cruel rulers and soldiers of a smoldering pit of anguish, devils delight
in tormenting mortals and claiming their souls.
(Left to right) pit fiend, succubus, imp, ice devil
Fallen Servants of the Gods: The creatures that would become devils were
once servants of the gods. Rallying behind their leader, Asmodeus, the devils
helped to slay one of their divine masters. As a result, they were cursed and cast
out into the devastated remains of that god's domain, which became the Nine
Hells. The devils that now inhabit the Nine Hells are the same creatures that
marched across astral battlefields, and though they have spent eons in their new
home, the memories of their mutiny and subsequent exile remain fresh. These
recollections fill devils with loathing and rage, and they burn with hatred lor
the gods—a hatred they have turned on the mortal races as well. Devils (par
ticularly the ascended Asmodeus and his exarchs, the Lords ofthe Nine) seek to
S r !lO \ Mini', hi k A J
corrupt the creation ofthe gods by seizing the souls of mortals and bending them
to their will. Each soul captured strengthens the armies of the Nine Hells. One
day, the infernal legions say, the world will be so weakened and the devils will
be so strong that they will march on the domains ofthe gods and seize control
for themselves.
I mp Level 3 L u r k er
Small immortal humanoid (devil) XP 150
HP 40; Bloodied 20
AC 17, Fortitude 13, Reflex 17. W i l l 15
Speed 4, fly 6
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +8
Perception +8
Darkvision
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 5 damage.
Vanish (illusion) • At-Will
Effect: The imp becomes invisible until the end of its next turn or until it hits or misses with an
attack.
4 Tail Sting (poison) • Recharge when the imp uses vanish
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 3 damage, and the target takes ongoing 10 poison damage and a -2 penalty to Will
(save ends both).
Skills Arcana +9, Bluff+9, Stealth +9
Str 12 (+2) Dex 17 (+4) Wis 14 (+3)
Con 16 (+4) Int 16 (+4) Cha 16 (+4)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Supernal
Tempters of Mortals: The followers of Asmodeus are, like their master,
nothing if not cunning. Many devils prefer to capture the souls of mortals
through nonviolent means, even convincing mortals to give up their souls of their
own free will. For example, imps (small, red-skinned devils with leathery wings
and stinger-tipped tails) whisper promises of power in mortals' ears, corrupting
them with unholy contracts that divulge the secrets of arcane and divine magic.
Succubi (bat-winged humanoids that appear as males and females of unparalleled
beauty) use lust and greed as their tools, offering pleasure, wealth, or power
in exchange for a mortal's eternal soul. Both of these types of devils are capable
of fulfilling their promises, but everything comes with a price. A wizard who
agrees to a contract with an imp might learn spells beyond imagination, but he is
likely to sink slowly into madness as the dark magic erodes his sanity.
Soldiers of Hell: Not all devils are content to gain mortal souls through
manipulation or seduction. Some vividly recall their struggles against the gods
and have made themselves the champions of battle in the Nine Hells. In the old
days, pit fiends (red-scaled, winged monsters that tower over humans) were commanders
of the armies ofthe gods, viziers at the side of divine exarchs, or barons
i uling over distant settlements in the astral domains. Now, they command
dominions in the Nine Hells and all but explode with fury toward the gods and
I heir mortal creations. Ice devils, from the frozen wastelands ofthe layer of the
Nine I Iclls known as Cania, were once military commanders that have been
twisted and corrupted. In a dark mockery of their former tactical prowess, they
throw legions of lesser devils at their enemies with no care for the lives of their
kin. Chain devils are jailers and torturers, using pain and suffering to extract
information from the enemies of Asmodeus. The armies of the Nine Hells are
largely made up of legion devils-cruci, pitiless warriors that gather in countless
numbers from the scorched plains of Avernus to the deepest chasms of Nessus.
All these kinds of devils are shadowy reflections of their former selves, made evil
and vicious by their fall from grace.
HP 90: Bloodied 4S
AC 23. Fortitude 19. Reflex 21, Will 23
Speed 6, fly 6
Resist 10 fire
STANDARD ACTIONS
©CorruptingTouch • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 6 damage.
4 Charming Kiss (charm) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); 12 vs. Will
Hit: The target cannot attack the succubus. The effect lasts until the succubus or one of its allies
attacks the target, the succubus drops to 0 hit points, or the succubus uses this power again. If
the target is affected by charming kiss at the end of the encounter, the effect lasts until the succubus
fails to kiss the target during a 24-hour period. See also loyal consort.
>f Dominate (charm) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +12 vs. Will
Hit: The target is dominated until the end of the succubus's next turn.
MINOR ACTIONS
Change Shape (polymorph) • At-Will
Effect: The succubus alters its physical form to appear as a Medium humanoid until it uses
change shape again or until it drops to 0 hit points. To assume a specific individual's form, the
succubus must have seen that individual. Other creatures can make a DC 30 Insight check to
discern that the form is a disguise.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Loyal Consort (charm) • At-Will
Trigger: A melee or a ranged attack targets the succubus while it is adjacent to a creature
affected by its charming kiss.
Effect (Immediate Interrupt): The triggering attack instead targets the creature affected by the
succubus's charming kiss.
Skills Bluff +15. Diplomacy +15. Insight +13
Str 11 (+4) Dex 18 (+8) Wis 19 (+8)
Con 10 (+4) Int 15 (+6) Cha 22 (+10)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Supernal
Chain Devil (Kyton) Level 11 Skirmisher
Medium immortal humanoid (devil) XP 600
HP 116: Bloodied 58
AC 2S. Fortitude 23. Reflex 25. Will 21
Speed 7
Resist 20 fire
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +14
Perception +7
Darkvision
© Spiked Chain (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 2d4 + S damage.
+ Double Attack • At-Will
Effect: The chain devil uses spiked chain twice.
+ Hellish Chains • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +14 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d4 + 5 damage, and the target is restrained (save ends). The chain devil can restrain only
one creature at a time.
MINOR ACTIONS
Dance of Battle • At-Will
Effect: The chain devil shifts 1 square.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Dance of Defiance • Recharge when first bloodied
Trigger. The chain devil is the target of a melee attack.
Effect (Immediate Interrupt): The chain devil shifts 1 square,
t Chains of Vengeance • Encounter
Trigger The chain devil is first bloodied.
Effect (Free Action): The chain devil uses spiked chain twice.
Skills Intimidate +11
Str 19 (+9) Dex 24 (+12) Wis 15 (+7)
Con 20 (+10) Int 14 (+7) Cha 13 (+6)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Supernal
Equipment spiked chain
Legion Devil Hellguard Level 11 Minion Soldier
Medium immortal humanoid (devil)
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +8
AC 27. Fortitude 24. Reflex 23. Will 21 Perception +6
Speed 6, teleport 3 Darkvision
M I N I O N
t
Squad Defense
The legion devil hellguard gains a +2 bonus to its AC while adjacent to another legion devil.
STANDARD ACTIONS
0) Longsword (fire, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 9 damage, and the target takes 4 fire damage if it willingly moves during its next turn.
Str 14 (+7) Dex 12 (+6) Wis 12 (+6)
Con 14 (+7) Int 10 (+S) Cha 12 (+6)
Alignment evil Languages Supernal
Equipment longsword
^ I » VII I SJ
Legion Devil Veteran Level 16 Minion Soldier
Medium immortal humanoid (devil)
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +11
AC 32. Fortitude 29. Reflex 28. Will 26 Perception +9
Speed 7, teleport 3 Darkvision
M I N I O N
Squad Defense
The legion devil veteran gains a +2 bonus to AC while adjacent to another legion devil.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Longsword (fire, weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature): +21 vs. AC
Hit: 12 damage, and the target takes 6 fire damage if it willingly moves during its next turn.
Str 14 (+10) Dex 12 (+9) Wis 12 (+9)
Con 14 (+10) Int 10 (+8) Cha 12 (+9)
Alignment evil Languages Supernal
Equipment longsword
HP 195; Bloodied 97
AC 36. Fortitude 33. Reflex 31. Will 29
Speed 8
Immune cold
Initiative +18
Perception +13
Darkvision I
O Crippling Cold (cold) • Aura 2
Any enemy that starts its turn in the aura is slowed until the start
of the ice devil's next turn.
Warming Weakness
When the ice devil takes fire damage, its crippling cold aura ends until the
ice devil reactivates it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Icy Longspear (cold, weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +2S vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 15 cold damage.
Effect: The ice devil marks the target until the end of the ice devil's next turn.
<- Freezing Breath (cold) • Recharge Q] iX] [0]
Attack: Close blast 5 (creatures in the blast); +23 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 4d8 + 18 cold damage.
Effect: The target is slowed (save ends).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is immobilized instead of slowed (save ends).
Skills Endurance +23
Str 25 (+17) Dex 22 (+16) Wis 17 (+13)
Con 27 (+18) Int 15 (+12) Cha 19 (+14)
Alignment evil Languages Supernal
Equipment longspear
"Not all the hells are places of fire."
—Valthrun the Prescient
Mnntlrrn /
Pit Fiend Level 26 Elite Soldier (Leader)
Large immortal humanoid (devil) XP 18.000
TRAITS
HP 486: Bloodied 243
AC 42. Fortitude 40. Reflex 36. Will 38
Speed 12. fly 12 (clumsy), teleport 10
Resist 30 fire, 15 poison
Saving Throws +2: Action Points 1
Initiative +22
Perception +23
Darkvision
O Aura of Fear (fear) • Aura S
Any enemy in the aura at the start of the pit fiend's turn is marked
by the pit fiend until the end of the pit fiend's next turn.
0 Aura of Fire (fire) • Aura S
Any enemy that enters the aura or starts its turn there takes I S fire damage.
STANDARD ACTIONS
® Flame-Touched Mace (fire, weapon) • At-Will
At lock: Melee 2 (one creature); +31 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 +11 fire damage, and the target takes ongoing 10 fire damage (save ends).
4 Tail Sting (poison) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +29 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The target takes ongoing 25 poison damage and is weakened (save ends both).
4 Pit Fiend Frenzy • At-Will
Effect: The pit fiend uses flametouched mace and tail sting.
MOVE ACTIONS
Tactical Teleport (teleportation) • Recharge : :| |X i i
Effect: Close burst 10 (one or two allies in the burst). The pit fiend teleports each target to a
square in the burst.
MINOR ACTIONS
Point of Terror (fear) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +29 vs. Will
Hit: The target takes a -5 penalty to all defenses until the end of the pit fiend's next turn.
Irresistible Command (charm, fire) • At Will (1/round)
Effect: Ranged 10 (one devil ally that is lower in level than the pit fiend). The pit fiend slides the
target up to 5 squares, and the target drops to 0 hit points and is destroyed. Each creature
within 2 squares of the target then takes 3d10 + 9 fire damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Nightmarish Punishment (fear, fire) • At Will
Trigger: An enemy marked by and within 2 squares of the pit fiend shifts or makes an attack that
doesn't include it as a target.
Attack (Opportunity Action): Melee 2 (triggering enemy); +33 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 11 fire damage, and the pit fiend slides the target up to 2 squares to a square adjacent
to it.
Miss: Half damage.
Skills Bluff+27. Insight +23, Intimidate +27. Religion +24
Str 32 (+24) Dex 24 (+20) Wis 20 (+18)
Con 27 (+21) Int 22 (+19) Cha 28 (+22)
Alignment evil Languages Supernal
Equipment mace
DISPLACER BEAST
Seldom where they seem, displacer beasts mislead enemies by concealing their true loca
ti on, which helps them evade the dangers of the Feywild where they live and hunt. They
also prowl the forests and caverns of the natural world, where their glowing emerald eyes
appear to change position constantly as they stare out from the darkness.
Displacer beasts look like enormous
feline predators, but their barbed tentacles
and powers of misdirection
make them far deadlier. They
quietly stalk their
prey before bringing
it down as
quickly as possible
in an
ambush.
The dis
placer
beast's
cunning,
stealth,
and ferocity have
earned it a reputation
as one of the
most well-known
predators ofthe
Feywild. The
creature's image is
used in heraldry and
literature to indicate a
character or an organi
/.at ion that is elusive,
tricky, or mysterious.
Some displacer
beasts make their
lairs behind dense
foliage, in small
caves, or within the boughs of massive
trees. Others prowl from place to place, attacking prey where
they can find it. Savvy explorers know to avoid locations where displacer beasts
might dwell, but they also know that the creatures can spring out from anywhere.
For any ordinary person or animal, a surprise attack by a displacer beast means
a quick death. The beast's speed is so great, and its attacks so fierce, that it can
swiftly drop anyone who is not prepared and trained for battle.
Displacer Beast Level 9 Skirmisher
Large fey magical beast XP 400 jr
HP 97; Bloodied 48 Initiative+11 CW
AC 23. Fortitude 21. Reflex 22. Will 20 Perception +12 f t
Speed 12 Low-light vision J f {
TRAITS
Displacement (illusion) 1
When a melee or a ranged attack hits the displacer beast, if the
player rolled an odd number on the attack roll, the attack misses.^
If the player rolled an even number on the attack roll, the attack
hits as normal, and the beast loses this trait until the start of its
next turn.
Threatening Reach
The displacer beast can make opportunity attacks against enemies within 2 squares of it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
©Tentacle • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage.
4 Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 6 damage.
+ Cunning Blitz • At Will
Effect: The displacer beast shifts up to half its speed. At any point during that movement, it uses
tentacle once, or two times against different creatures.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS • Shifting Tactics • At Will
Trigger: An attack misses the displacer beast.
Effect (Free Action): The displacer beast shifts 1 square.
Skills Stealth +14
Str 18(+8) Dex 20(+9) Wis17(+7)
Con 17 (+7) Int 4 (+1) Cha 10 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Difficult to Pin Down: With their displacement ability and deft movement,
displacer beasts can avoid most enemies, which means the creatures usually
enter battle as the aggressors. They attack
the weakest targets first, using their maneuverability
to slip past tougher defenders.
When hunted, displacer beasts spring
ambushes in thick forests or other places
where they can quickly escape from
enemies that prove too strong. Ifthey're outmatched
or gravely wounded, the beasts
nearly always try to retreat, unless starvation
drives them to fight on in hopes of claiming a meal.
Intelligent Predators: Displacer beasts hold a comfortable spot near the top
of the lood chain. Their predatory skill is unmatched, and they possess strong
instincts and far greater intelligence than most ordinary animals. Displacer
Iteusts set ambushes, track their prey by following clues (not just scents), and lure
"I can't tell where it is!
My sword keeps cutting
empty air!"
—Douven Staul
IIILIII i l 1 U 111 A L I
STANDARD ACTIONS
TRAITS
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Savage Displacer Beast
Large fey magical beast
Level 11 Brute
XP 600
enemies into traps and hazards when fighting in a dangerous area. They're also
capable of making relatively intricate plans. For example, they might remember
which trade routes have seasonal traffic and return in the spring to plague travelers.
It's rare to encounter more than two displacer beasts (usually a mated pair)
at one time, but a beast might lead a pack of other wild predators. Because of
their natural instinct to seek dominance within a pack, displacer beasts prefer to
attack animals rather than humanoids.
Tough and Smart Pack Lords: Displacer beasts are rare as a species, and
their pack lords number even fewer. These massive mutants have the same
intelligence as ordinary people and sometimes lead groups of normal displacer
beasts. Whereas standard beasts patrol large hunting grounds, pack lords terrorize
entire regions. They maintain lairs that can handle their bulk, such as wide,
moss-laden Feywild caverns or halls within crumbled ruins.
HP 136; Bloodied 68
AC 23. Fortitude 23. Reflex 25. Will 21
Speed 8
Displacement (illusion)
When a melee or a ranged attack hits the displacer beast, if the
player rolled an odd number on the attack roll, the attack misses.
If the player rolled an even number on the attack roll, the attack I
as normal, and the beast loses this trait until the start of its next turn.
Threatening Reach
The displacer beast can make opportunity attacks against enemies within 2 squares of it
©Tentacle • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 4d8 + 3 damage, and the displacer beast can push the target 1 square.
\ Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 8 damage.
Brutal Tactics • At Will
Trigger: An enemy misses the displacer beast with a melee attack.
Effect (Free Action): The displacer beast pushes the triggering enemy 1 square.
Skills Stealth +15
Str 18 (+9) Dex 21 (+10) Wis 17 (+8)
Con 16 (+8) Int 4 (+2) Cha10(+5)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Initiative +10
Perception +8
Low-light vision ,
b r
HP 258; Bloodied 129 Initiative +14
AC 27. Fortitude 25. Reflex 26. W i l l 24 Perception +15
Speed 12 Low-light vision
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
Displacement (illusion)
When a melee or a ranged attack hits the pack lord, if the
player rolled an odd number on the attack roll, the attack
misses. If the player rolled an even number on the attack roll,
the attack hits as normal, and the beast loses this trait until the
start of its next turn.
| Nimble Stride
The pack lord ignores difficult terrain and speed penalties for squeezing.
Threatening Reach
The pack lord can make opportunity attacks against enemies within 3 squares of it.
STANDARD ACTIONS s Tentacle • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 + 7 damage.
4 Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 10 damage.
4 Cunning Blitz • At Will
Effect: The pack lord shifts up to half its speed. At any point during that movement, it uses tentacle
once, or two times against different creatures.
<• Clear the Path • Recharge when first bloodied
Attack: Close burst 3 (enemies in the burst); +16 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage, and the pack lord slides the target up to 3 squares.
Miss: Half damage, and the pack lord can slide the target 1 square.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Superior Shifting Tactics • At Will
Trigger: An attack misses the pack lord.
Effect (Free Action): The pack lord shifts 1 square. Before or after the movement, it uses tentacle.
Skills Stealth +17
Str 24 (+13) Dex 2 3 (+12) Wis 18 (+10)
Con 17 (+9) Int 10 (+6) Cha 12 (+7)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Prized as Guards and Pets: Displacer beasts will follow more intelligent
creatures, but only if they gain some benefit from the arrangement. Most often,
displacer beasts guard secluded rooms in a palace or accompany wealthy or
influential humanoids. Occasionally, they arc captured and paraded about as
status symbols, especially by callow young eladrin nobles. A displacer beast
iniglil serve a master in exchange for regular meals of fresh meat or out of loyalty
lo a creature that saved its life or kept it from harm. Despite their willingness to
l><- (rained in these circumstances, displacer beasts are smart enough to realize
when a situation changes, and they might turn against their masters If necessary
lo protect ihelr own lives.
DOPPELGANGER
Infiltrators, spies, and impersonators, doppelgangers are humanoid shapeshifters that
take on the appearances of other humanoids. They are cunning opponents that lure in
their vie tints or throw off pursuit with misdirection and disguise.
b r
Few creatures spread fear, suspicion, and deceit better than doppelgangers do.
Found in every land, with no true homeland of their own, doppelgangers transform
their bodies to blend in with other races. They are much like humans in
that they display a wide variety of personalities and dispositions. Doppelgangers
as a whole are few in number, but when living among other races, they congregate
in small groups. Three disguised doppelgangers might live together in
a dwarven stronghold city, outwardly appearing to be stalwart dwarves while
secretly plotting to bring down the city's defenses. Their knowledge of many cultures
and their ability to manipulate others allow doppelgangers to walk about
freely with little fear of detection.
Sowers of Paranoia:
Unscrupulous people
know that hiring a doppelganger
(if they coidd
afford to do so) is the
surest way to slip an agent
into the ranks of their
enemies. With the ability
to look like anyone, a
doppelganger can launch
an attack in one guise,
duck around the corner
and assume another
appearance, and evade
pursuit by looking like a
dumbfounded bystander.
With the right disguise,
a doppelganger can stroll
past sentries, coax secret
information out of confidants,
or walk out of a
noble's manor carrying
looted treasure in plain
sight. Doppelgangers can
get closer to an enemy
than any other type of
assassin can, taking on
the visage of a trusted ally
before planting a knife in
an unsuspecting back. Capturing a doppelganger can prove calamitous to a community,
immediately casting suspicion on everyone-after all. if there could be
one doppelganger, there might be more. As a result, some doppelgangcrs spend
months or years infdtrating a town for the express purpose of revealing their
deception when the time is right, then throwing suspicion onto others and letting
the community destroy itself.
Doppelganger Sneak Level 3 Skirmisher
Medium natural humanoid (shapechanger) XP ISO
HP 45; Bloodied 22
AC 17. Fortitude 14. Reflex 16. W i l l 15
Speed 6
STANDARD ACTION
Initiative +6
Perception +2
AI i" J
0 Short Sword (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 6 damage, or 2d6 + 6 if the doppelganger has combat advantage against the target.
MINOR ACTIONS
Change Shape (polymorph) • At Will
Effect: The doppelganger alters its physical form to appear as a Medium humanoid until it uses
change shape again or until it drops to 0 hit points. To assume a specific individual's form, the
doppelganger must have seen that individual. Other creatures can make a DC 30 Insight check
to discern that the form is a disguise.
+ Shapeshifter Feint • At Will (1/round)
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); -1-6 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target grants combat advantage to the doppelganger until the end of the doppelgang
er's next turn.
Skills Bluff +8, Insight +7, Stealth +9
Str 11 (+1) Dex 16 (+4) Wis 12 (+2)
Con 13 (+2) Int 10 (+1) Cha 1S (+3)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment short sword
"I've been so many people I can hardly remember my own
name. I was a male dwarf, stocky and strong, when I
traveled to Vor Rukoth in search of the Rod of Kings. I
was a female eladrin for a trip through the Feywild, lithe
and full of laughter. Fve been an ore, a minotaur, and a
bugbear for different missions. Sometimes 1 wake up and
have to touch my face to remember who I am that day.
And sometimes I can't remember whether I'm supposed to
woo you or kill you without glancing in the mirror first."
—Aunn, doppelganger spy
© Dagger (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 2d4 + 6 damage.
Perfect Replica (illusion, polymorph) • At-Will
Effect: Melee 1 (one Medium creature). The doppelganger takes on the form of the target and
alters its clothing and gear to match those of the target. Until the end of the doppelganger's
next turn, the target is immobilized and takes 6d8 extra damage from the doppelganger's
dagger power. See also replica switch.
MINOR ACTIONS
Change Shape (polymorph) • At Will
Effect: The doppelganger alters its physical form to appear as a Medium humanoid until it uses
change shape again or until it drops to 0 hit points. To assume a specific individual's form, the
doppelganger must have seen that individual. Other creatures can make a DC 32 Insight check
to discern that the form is a disguise.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Replica Switch • At-Will
Requirement: The doppelganger must be adjacent to an enemy affected by its perfect replica.
Trigger: A melee or ranged attack from an enemy unaffected by the doppelganger's perfect replica
targets the doppelganger.
Effect (Opportunity Action): The doppelganger and the enemy affected by its perfect replica swap
places, and the triggering attack instead targets the enemy affected by the doppelganger's perfect
replica.
Skills Bluff +14. Insight +11. Stealth +16
Str 12 (+6) Dex 22 (+11) Wis 13 (+6)
Con 18 (+9) Int 10 (+5) Cha 19 (+9)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment dagger
Dedicated Impersonators: When a doppelganger assumes another form, it
can stay in that shape for prolonged periods of time. A doppelganger might spend
weeks, months, or years in the guise of an eladrin wizard or a human soldier,
maintaining the deception around the clock to keep from being discovered.
Some doppelgangers find this effort stressful and revert to their natural forms
when they believe that no one is looking. Still, their ability to hold a form over
time allows doppelgangers to live among other races, developing relationships
with neighbors and becoming a part of the community without raising suspicion.
The farmer from down the road, the baker's wife, or a distant relative come to
visit could be a doppelganger despite having been familiar to a person for years.
A few particularly savvy doppelgangers have risen to great power by infiltrating
other races, with ruinous results for those creatures.
Wielders of Many Powers: Doppelgangers use magic and other supernatu
ral powers just as members of other races do, though often with more guile and
finesse. Doppelgangers prefer magic that complements their natural shapeshifting
ability and helps them infiltrate other groups; for example, they favor illusion
magic, since it allows them to create distractions that can redirect suspicion. A
few doppelgangers turn to the darker powers granted by shadow magic, augmenting
their skill at blending in by adding the ability to vanish from sight. Some
doppelgangers master psionic magic and can detect the surface thoughts of
others, allowing them to assuage suspicions by providing the right answers to any
questions put to them.
Doppelganger Master Assassin Level 19 Lurker
Medium natural humanoid (shapechanger) XP 2,400
HP 142; Bloodied 71 Initiative +20
AC 33. Fortitude 31. Reflex 32. W i l l 29 Perception +12
Speed 6
*
Blend In
While the doppelganger is adjacent lo at least one other creature, it can make a Stealth
check to become hidden. The doppelganger remains hidden even if it does not have cover or
concealment.
STANDARD ACTIONS
H Dagger (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +24 vs. AC
Hit: 3d4 + 6 damage.
4 Assassin's Strike (necrotic, weapon) • Recharge when the doppelganger uses vanish
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +24 vs. AC
Hit: 3d4 + 6 damage plus 4d10 +16 necrotic damage.
Miss: 3d10 + 12 necrotic damage.
Vanish (illusion) • At Will
Effect: The doppelganger becomes invisible until the end of its next turn and shifts up to its
speed.
MINOR ACTIONS
Alter Shape (illusion, polymorph) • At Will
Effect: The doppelganger alters its physical form to appear as a Medium humanoid and changes
the appearance of its clothing and gear until it uses alter shape again or until it drops to 0 hit
points. To assume a specific individual's form, the doppelganger must have seen that individual.
Other creatures can make a DC 38 Insight check to discern that the form is a disguise.
Skills Bluff +20. Insight +17. Stealth +21
Sir 11 (+9) Dex 25 (+16) Wis 16 (+12)
Con 22 (+15) Int 13 (+10) Cha 23 (+15)
Alignment unaligned
f qulpment dagger
Languages Common
DRAGON
If any creature can claim to be an enlightened sage, a powerful tyrant, and a terrible
monster, it is a dragon. Majestic and deadly, these creatures strike fear into the hearts of
any who fall under the shadows of their enormous winged forms.
The size and majesty of dragons have shrouded them in myth. As ancient as the
world, dragons are a living embodiment of legend. The oldest among them possess
knowledge exceeding what most mortals can ever hope to attain. They hold the
deepest secrets of the cosmos within their grasp. Dragons are no mere beasts
ready to fall victim to a knight-errant or a treasure hunter. They arc sages, oracles,
and prophets: they are forces of nature capable of destruction and mayhem.
Fledgling W h i t e Dragon Level 1 Solo Brute
Large natural magical beast (dragon) XP 500
HP 128; Bloodied 64 Initiative +0
AC 15. Fortitude 15. Reflex 11. W i l l 13 Perception +7
Speed 6 (ice walk), fly 6 Darkvision
Resist 5 cold
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
Savage Blood
While the dragon is bloodied, it can score a critical hit on a roll
STANoDf A17R-D2 0A. CTIONS
© Bite (cold) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature): +6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d12 + 11 cold damage.
\ Claws • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one or two creatures); +6 vs. AC. If the dragon targets only one creature, it can
make this attack twice against that creature.
Hit: 1d12 +4 damage.
<- Breath Weapon (cold) • Recharge :-[][lj]
Attack: Close blast 5 (creatures in the blast): +4 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 4 cold damage, and the target is slowed (save ends).
Miss: Half damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
+ Tail Slap • At-Will
Trigger An enemy hits the dragon while flanking it.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Melee 2 (triggering enemy); +4 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 1d12 +4 damage, and the dragon pushes the target up to 3 squares.
Bloodied Breath • Encounter
Trigger. The dragon is first bloodied.
Effect (Free Action): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses it.
Skills Athletics +9
Str 18 (+4) Dex 11 (+0) Wis 1S (+2)
Con 16 (+3) Int 8 (-1) Cha 8 (-1)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
r .
/ mm - f
H
- "V
-
3f i
/ • i W A % \
* V
- W 4 I ',/
(l eft to right) blue dragon, black dragon, green dragon
The Colors of Evil: The most famous and most feared dragons are part of
the chromatic bloodline, including black, blue, green, red, and white dragons.
Chromatic dragons have a penchant for evil and cruelty. They live to exert their
dominance over other creatures through terror and violence.
Even among chromatic dragons, few share the cruelty of blacks. A black
dragon does not hunt out of a need to survive or to protect its territory. Instead,
a black dragon chases and tortures prey for the pleasure it gains from inspiring
fear and causing pain. Black dragons are also among the most cowardly and
cautious chromatic dragons. A black dragon waits in ambush or attacks from concealment.
When a black dragon retreats, victims of its attack sometimes mistake
its departure for a genuine withdrawal, not realizing until too late that the black
is merely preparing for another assault.
Blue dragons are the most vain, proud, and arrogant ofthe chromatic dragons. A
blue dragon delights in asserting its power over lesser creatures. A blue dragon will
battle foes or preside over humanoids simply to exhibit its strength. When creatures
venerate a blue dragon and respect its territorial claims, it can be the most reasonable
of the chromatic dragons. Most blue dragons lair in areas where storms are
fierce and frequent. As a result, many blues live along the coast, where they extort
lood and wealth from those who lack the strength to stand against them.
Few dragons are as reviled by humanoids as the sly, forest-dwelling green
dragons. Although green dragons are weaker and less destructive than their
chromatic kin, they are more cunning and deceptive. A green dragon tells lies as
easily as other creatures breathe. A green relishes intrigue, preferring to achieve
its goals through guile and betrayal rather than combat.
IIUAi .1 l A ^ ^ f l k
The savage white dragons lair in the coldest climes ofthe world, where they
think of little more than their next meal and the contents of their treasure
hoards. The oldest and most intelligent among them might seek to dominate
other creatures, if only to feel assured of their power and superiority.
When a legend or a fable tells of
a dragon that laid kingdoms to waste,
devoured virtuous maidens, or incinerated
valiant heroes, then odds are the subject of
the tale is a red dragon. The most voracious
of the chromatic dragons, a red dragon consumes
far more than it requires. All dragons
are avaricious, but a red dragon possesses
greed that far surpasses that of its kin. It
is also a vindictive creature, dwelling on
the smallest slights and delivering revenge
tenfold for territorial intrusions, thefts,
and insults. Reds are not mindless brutes,
however. They are accomplished strategists
that spend their idle time developing tactics and contingency plans for virtually
any scenario.
Driven by Greed and Ego: The secret to understanding chromatic dragons
is comprehending their worldview. One trait unites and informs their psychology:
the belief that they are superior beings.
Dragons consider themselves more powerful,
intelligent, important, and worthy of
being dominators than any other mortal
creature. Chromatic dragons are born with
this sense of superiority, and it is a cornerstone
of their personalities and worldviews.
Trying to humble any dragon is like trying
to convince the wind to stop blowing. To
chromatic dragons, humanoids are animals,
fit to serve as prey or beasts of burden,
unworthy of respect or acknowledgment.
If one characteristic other than arrogance defines chromatic dragons, it's greed.
Dragon hoards are the stuff of legend-enormous piles of gold, gleaming gems, and
magic items, enough wealth to buy a kingdom. And yet dragons have no interest in
commerce, despite the value of their hoards. They amass wealth for no other reason
than to have it. A chromatic dragon's desire to create a hoard is a psychological
need, or, arguably, a biological imperative. The source of this desire is a mystery, but
it probably lies somewhere in a dragon's enjoyment of possessing what others lack.
Dangerous Lairs: One thing dragons and humanoids share is the desire to
find permanent shelter. Humanoids want a place that offers comfort and a little
security. A dragon, with its innate toughness, poor tactile senses, and tolerance
for severe conditions, instead chooses a home that is defensible, has multiple
ways to enter and leave, and that provides the utmost security lor its hoard.
"Rapacious, cunning,
and destructive, red
dragons are Tiamat's
favored children,
embodying the worst
that dragonkind has to
offer...
. . But stripped of life,
of hunger, of the needs
of the flesh, an undead
dragon is simply evil
incarnate."
—Jothan Iron spell
f.<> » Uumlan A /
TRAITS
Chromatic dragons rarely construct lairs and instead find naturally occurring
locations that can accommodate them. A blue dragon might lair within a sea
cave that is occupied by subservient pirates. A red dragon could claim the caldera
of an active volcano. After provoking a war, a green dragon might inhabit a city
brought to ruin through the dragon's machinations.
Level 3 Solo Brute
XP 750
Initiative +1
Perception +8
Darkvision
Young W h i t e Dragon
Large natural magical beast (dragon)
HP 200: Bloodied 100
AC 17. Fortitude 17. Reflex 13. W i l l 15
Speed 6 (ice walk), fly 6
Resist 10 cold
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
Action Recovery
Whenever the dragon ends its turn, any dazing, stunning, or
dominating effect on it ends.
Instinctive Rampage
On an initiative of 10 + the dragon's initiative check, the dragon can move up to its speed as
a free action. The dragon can move through enemies' spaces and gains resist 5 to all damage
during the move. Each time the dragon enters an enemy's space for the first time during the
move, it can use claw against that enemy. If the attack hits, the target also falls prone. If the
dragon cannot use a free action to take this move due to a dominating or stunning effect, then
that effect ends instead of the dragon making this move.
Savage Blood
While bloodied, the dragon can score a critical hit on a roll of 17-20.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite (cold) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 4 cold damage.
Miss: 1d10 cold damage.
4 Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage.
4 Dragon's Fury • At-Will
Effect: The dragon uses claw twice.
<- Breath Weapon (cold) • Recharge X|[U]
Attack: Close blast 5 (creatures in the blast); +6 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d8 + 6 cold damage, and the target is slowed (save ends).
Miss: Half damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Tail Slap • At Will
Trigger: An enemy hits the dragon while flanking it.
Attack (Free Action): Melee 2 (triggering enemy); +6 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage, and the dragon pushes the target up to 5 squares.
<- Bloodied Breath • Encounter
Iriffffrr: The dragon is first bloodied.
I lint (Free At lion): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses it.
SkilK Athletics <10
S t r l H ( t S ) Dex 11 (+1) Wis 15 (+3)
Con 18 (+ S) Int 8 (+0) Cha 8 (+0)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
• 111 VI .1 IK Tlf
Young Black Dragon Level 4 Solo Lurker
Large natural magical beast (aquatic, dragon) XP 87S
Initiative +11
Perception +9 J
Darkvision f
HP 208: Bloodied 104
AC 18. Fortitude 16. Reflex 18. Will 15
Speed 7 (swamp walk), fly 7, swim 7
Resist 10 acid
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
Acidic Blood (acid)
Whenever the dragon takes damage while it is bloodied, each
creature adjacent to it takes 5 acid damage.
Aquatic
The dragon can breathe underwater. In aquatic combat, it gains a +2 bonus
to attack rolls against nonaquatic creatures.
Instinctive Devouring
On an initiative of 10 + its initiative check, the dragon can use a free action to charge or to use
bite. If the dragon cannot use a free action to make this attack due to a dominating or stunning
effect, then that effect ends instead of the dragon making the attack.
Action Recovery
Whenever the dragon ends its turn, any dazing, stunning, or dominating effect on it ends.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite (acid) •At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage, and ongoing 5 acid damage (save ends).
Miss: 5 acid damage.
+ Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one or two creatures); +9 vs. AC. If the dragon targets only one creature, it can
make this attack twice against that creature.
Hit: 2d6 + 5 damage.
<- Breath Weapon (acid) • Recharge [t ij
Attack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +7 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 3 acid damage, and ongoing 5 acid damage (save ends).
Miss: Half damage.
Shroud of Gloom • Recharge I i
Effect: Close burst S (enemies in the burst). Each target gains vulnerable 5 acid and takes a -2
penalty to attack rolls until the end of the encounter. A character can use a standard action to
attempt a DC 10 Heal check to end this effect on himself or herself or an adjacent ally.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
\ Tail Sweep • At Will
Trigger. An enemy misses the dragon with a melee attack.
Attack (Opportunity Action): Melee 3 (triggering enemy); +7 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d6 + 2 damage, and the target falls prone. In addition, each of the target's allies adjacent to
the target takes 5 damage.
<- Bloodied Breath • Encounter
lrigger: The dragon is first bloodied.
I//<•< I (Free Action): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses it.
Skills Stealth +12
Sir 16(+S) Dex 20(+7) Wis15(+4)
Con 12 (+3) Int 12 (+3) Cha 10 (+2)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
b r r
TRAITS
Young Green Dragon Level 5 Solo Skirmisher
Large natural magical beast (dragon) XP 1,000
HP 2 52: Bloodied 126
AC 19. Fortitude 17. Reflex 19. W i l l 17
Speed 8 (forest walk), fly 10
Resist 10 poison
Saving Throws + 5; Action Points 2
Initiative +9
Perception +10
Darkvision
0 Poisonous Wounds (poison) • Aura 1
While the dragon is bloodied, any enemy that ends its turn in the
aura takes ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends), or ongoing 10
poison damage (save ends) if that enemy is bloodied.
Action Recovery
Whenever the dragon ends its turn, any dazing, stunning, or dominating effect on it ends.
Instinctive Flyby
On an initiative of 10 + its initiative check, the dragon can use a free action to use flyby attack.
During the movement from flyby attack, the dragon gains a +4 bonus to all defenses against
opportunity attacks. If the dragon cannot use a free action to make this attack due to a dominating
or stunning effect, then that effect ends instead of the dragon making the attack.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite (poison) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 4 damage, and ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends).
Miss: 5 poison damage.
4 Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one or two creatures); +10 vs. AC. If the dragon targets only one creature, it can
make this attack twice against that creature.
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage, and the dragon shifts up to 2 squares.
<• Breath Weapon (poison) • Recharge X lO
Attack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast): +8 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d10 + 3 poison damage, and the target is slowed and takes ongoing 5 poison damage (save
ends both).
Aftereffect: The target is slowed (save ends).
4 <- Flyby Attack • Recharge [X] i i
Effect: The dragon flies up to its speed, ignoring slowing effects during the movement. The
dragon can use bite or breath weapon (if the power is recharged) at any point during the move.
MINOR ACTIONS
<- Luring Glare (charm) • At Will
Attack: Close blast 10 (one creature in the blast): +8 vs. Will
Hit: The dragon slides the target up to 3 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<c* Bloodied Breath • Encounter
Trigger: The dragon is first bloodied.
Effect (free Action): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses it.
Skills Bluff +1S. Insight +10. Stealth +12
Str 17(+5) Dex 20(+7) Wis16(+S)
Con 15 (+4) Int 1S (+4) Cha 17 (+S)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
MKAiiON I b'J
Young Blue Dragon Level 6 Solo A r t i l l e ry
Large natural magical beast (dragon) XP 1,250
TRAITS
STANDARD ACTIONS
® Gore (lightning) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 4d6 + 5 lightning damage.
+ Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one or two creatures); -1-11 vs. AC. If the dragon targets only one creature, it can
make this attack twice against that creature.
Hit: 2d6 + 5 damage.
Lightning Burst (lightning) • At Will
Attack: Area burst 2 within 20 (creatures in the burst): +11 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d10 + 5 lightning damage.
Miss: Half damage.
<- Breath Weapon (lightning) • Recharge Xjlfi]
Attack: Close blast 10 (up to three creatures in the blast); +11 vs. Reflex.
Hit: 3d8 + 8 lightning damage.
Miss: Half damage.
HP 296: Bloodied 148 Initiative +S
AC 20. Fortitude 20. Reflex 17. Will 18 Perception +11
Speed 8. fly 10 Darkvision
Resist 10 lightning
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
0 Uncontained Lightning (lightning) • Aura S
While the dragon is bloodied, any enemy that ends its turn in
the aura takes 5 lightning damage.
Action Recovery
Whenever the dragon ends its turn, any dazing, stunning, or dominating effect
on it ends.
Instinctive Lightning
On an initiative of 10 + its initiative check, the dragon can use a free action to fly up to its speed
and use lightning burst. This movement does not provoke opportunity attacks. If the dragon
cannot use a free action to make this attack due to a dominating or stunning effect, then that
effect ends instead of the dragon making the attack.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<- Wing Backblast • At Will
Trigger: An enemy hits the dragon with a melee attack.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Close burst 2 (enemies in the burst); +9 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target falls prone.
Effect: The dragon flies up to half its speed. This movement does not provoke opportunity
attacks.
<- Bloodied Breath • Encounter
Trigger: The dragon is first bloodied.
Effect (free Action): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses it.
Skills Athletics +13. Insight +11
Str 21 (+8) Dex 15 (+5) Wis 17 (+6)
Con 18 (+7) Int 12 (+4) Cha 13 (+4)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
AI.. i <VZ
A chromatic dragon doesn't rely only on the natural defenses of its lair.
A dragon employs magical guardians, traps, and subservient humanoids to
protect its treasures. A dragon that lacks such resources instead makes sure to
place its lair in such a dangerous and remote location that none but the most
audacious mortals could ever reach it. A white dragon might lair in a cave
within a massive icicle on a frozen mountainside. A black dragon could hide its
wealth deep underwater in the hull of a sunken ship.
Young Red Dragon Level 7 Solo Soldier
Large natural magical beast (dragon) XP 1,500
HP 332; Bloodied 166 Initiative+8 ii
AC 23. Fortitude 21. Reflex 18. Will 18 Perception+11 //
Speed 6. fly 8 Darkvision ff/*:
Resist 1S fire II Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2 li
I TRAITS
Action Recovery 1
Wjzs I
Whenever the dragon ends its turn, any dazing, stunning, or \
dominating effect on it ends.
Instinctive Assault
On an initiative of 10 + its initiative check, the dragon can use a free action to use bite or claw. If
the dragon cannot use a free action to make this attack due to a dominating or stunning effect,
then that effect ends instead of the dragon making the attack.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite (fire) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +12 vs. AC.
Hit: 2d10 + 6 damage. The target is grabbed and takes ongoing 5 fire damage, or ongoing 10 fire
damage if the dragon is bloodied, until the grab ends (escape DC 19).
4 Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one or two creatures); +12 vs. AC. If the dragon targets only one creature, it can
make this attack twice against that creature.
Hit: 2d8 + 5 damage, and the dragon grabs the target (escape DC 16) if it has fewer than two
creatures grabbed.
<- Breath Weapon (fire) • Recharge [X] 0
Attack: Close blast 5 (creatures in the blast); +10 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d12 + 7 fire damage, or 2d12 + 17 fire damage while the dragon is bloodied.
Miss: Half damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
\ Tail Strike • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy leaves a square within 2 squares of the dragon.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Melee 3 (triggering enemy); +10 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d6 + 5 damage, and the target falls prone.
<- Bloodied Breath • Encounter
Trigger: The dragon is first bloodied.
Effect (Free Action): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses it.
Skills Bluff+11. Insight +11
Str 2 2 (+9) Dex 17 (+6) Wis 16 (+6)
Con 19 (+7) Int 11 (+3) Cha 14 (+5)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
Deathbringer Dracolich Level 12 Solo Controller
Large natural magical beast (dragon, undead) XP 3,500 /, j l
TRAITS
HP 492; Bloodied 246
AC 26. Fortitude 26. Reflex 24. Will 24
Speed 6, fly 8 (clumsy)
Immune disease, poison, Resist 10 necrotic.
Vulnerable 10 radiant
Saving Throws -5; Action Points 2
Initiative +10
Perception +14
Darkvision
Action Recovery
Whenever the dragon ends its turn, any dazing, stunning, or
dominating effect on it ends.
Instinctive Domination
On an initiative of 10 + its initiative check, the dragon can use a free action to use mesmerizing
glance. This attack does not provoke opportunity attacks. If the dragon cannot use a free action
to make this attack due to a dominating or stunning effect, then that effect ends instead of the
dragon making the attack.
STANDARD ACTIONS
® Bite (necrotic) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 9 damage, and ongoing 10 necrotic damage (save ends).
4 Claws • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one or two creatures); +17 vs. AC. If the dragon targets only one creature, it can
make this attack twice against that creature.
Hit: 3d6 + 9 damage.
Effect: The dracolich slides the target up to 2 squares.
<• Breath Weapon (necrotic) • Recharge X ' I I
Attack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +15 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d12 + 8 necrotic damage, and the target is weakened (save ends).
Miss: Half damage, and the target is weakened until the end of its next turn.
MINOR ACTIONS
5T Mesmerizing Glance (charm, psychic) • At-Will (1/round)
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature): +1S vs. Will
Hit: The target is dominated (save ends).
Miss: If the target willingly moves to a square nearer to or adjacent to the dracolich before the
end of its next turn, it takes I S psychic damage.
Effect: The dracolich slides the target up to 2 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Bloodied Breath • Encounter
Trigger: The dragon is first bloodied.
Effect (Free Action): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses it.
Skills Insight +14
Str 22 (+12) Dex 19 (+10) Wis 17 (+9)
Con 19 (+10) Int 17 (+9) Cha 18 (+10)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
Elder W h i t e Dragon Level 17 Solo Brute
Huge natural magical beast (dragon) HP 668: Bloodied 334 Initiative H
AC 31. Fortitude 30. Reflex 27. Will 28 Perception +16 ,
Speed 8 (ice walk), fly 8 Darkvision!
Resist 15 cold
Saving Throws +5: Action Points 2
XP 8,000
Action Recovery
Whenever the dragon ends its turn, any dazing, stunning,
dominating effect on it ends.
Instinctive Rampage
On an initiative of 10 + the dragon's initiative check, the drago
can move up to its speed as a free action. The dragon can move
through enemies' spaces and gains resist 5 to all damage during the
move. Each time the dragon enters an enemy's space for the first time during
the move, it can use claw against that enemy. If the attack hits, the target also falls prone. If the
dragon cannot use a free action to take this move due to a dominating or stunning effect, then
that effect ends instead of the dragon making this move.
Savage Blood
While the dragon is bloodied, it can score a critical hit on a roll of 17-20.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite (cold) • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature): +22 vs. AC
Hit: Sd12 + 14 cold damage.
Miss: 1d12 cold damage.
4 Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature): +22 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 10 damage.
I Dragon's Fury • At-Will
Effect: The dragon uses claw twice.
^T Icy Tomb (cold) • Recharge >:j(ll)
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature): +20 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target is stunned, cannot be pulled, pushed, or slid, and takes ongoing 45 cold damage
(save ends all).
Aftereffect: The target is slowed and takes ongoing 20 cold damage (save ends both).
<- Breath Weapon (cold) • Recharge X|llf ' ^ H H HT
Attack: Close blast 5 (creatures in the blast); +20 vs. Reflex
Hit: 6d10 + 13 cold damage, and the target is slowed (save ends).
Miss: Half damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Tail Slap • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy hits the dragon while flanking it.
Attack (Free Action): Melee 3 (triggering enemy): +20 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d8 + 6 damage, and the dragon pushes the target up to 5 squares.
<- Bloodied Breath • Encounter
Trigger: The dragon is first bloodied.
Effect (Free Action): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses it.
Skills Athletics +19
Str 22 (+14) Dex 14 (+10) Wis 16 (+11)
Con 2 3 (+14) Int 13 (+9) Cha 13 (+9)
Alignment evil Languages Draconic
Elder Black Dragon Level 18 Solo Lurker
Huge natural magical beast (aquatic, dragon) XP 10,000
HP 676; Bloodied 338 Initiative +20
AC 32. Fortitude 30. Reflex 32. W i l l 28 Perception +17
Speed 8 (swamp walk), fly 8, swim 8 Darkvision
Resist 1S acid
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2 I
' 1
Acidic Blood (acid)
Whenever the dragon takes damage while it is bloodied,
each creature adjacent to it takes 10 acid damage.
Aquatic
The dragon can breathe underwater. In aquatic combat, it gains
a +2 bonus to attack rolls against nonaquatic creatures.
Instinctive Devouring
On an initiative of 10 + its initiative check, the dragon can use a free action to charge or to use
bite. If the dragon cannot use a free action to make this attack due to a dominating or stunning
effect, then that effect ends instead of the dragon making the attack.
Action Recovery
Whenever the dragon ends its turn, any dazing, stunning, or dominating effect on it ends.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite (acid) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 4d8 + 11 damage, and ongoing 10 acid damage (save ends).
Miss: 10 acid damage.
+ Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one or two creatures); +23 vs. AC. If the dragon targets only one creature, it can
make this attack twice against that creature.
Hit: 3d10 + 10 damage.
?r Acid Cob (acid) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +21 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target takes ongoing 30 acid damage and is blinded (save ends both).
<- Breath Weapon (acid) • Recharge X][l l]
Attack: Close blast S (enemies in the blast); +21 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d10 + S acid damage, and ongoing I S acid damage (save ends).
Miss: Half damage, and ongoing 10 acid damage (save ends).
Shroud of Gloom • Recharge i i
Effect: Close burst S (enemies in the burst). Each target gains vulnerable 10 acid and takes a -2
penalty to attack rolls until the end of the encounter. A character can use a standard action to
attempt a DC 17 Heal check to end this effect on himself or herself or an adjacent ally.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Tail Sweep • At Will
Trigger: An enemy misses the dragon with a melee attack.
Attack (Opportunity Action): Melee 4 (triggering enemy); +21 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 2 damage, and the target falls prone. In addition, each of the target's allies adjacent to
the target takes 10 damage.
<• Bloodied Breath • Encounter
Trigger: The dragon is first bloodied.
Effect (Free Action): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses It.
Skills Stealth +21
Sir 21 (+14) Dex 25 (+16) Wis 16 (+12)
Con 17 (+12) Int 16 (+12) Cha 14 (+11)
Allgnmrnl evil Languages Common. Drat onk
Elder Green Dragon Level 19 Solo S k i r m i s h e r . "
Huge natural magical beast (dragon) XP 12,000 ' f/
HP 720: Bloodied 360 Initiative+18
AC 33. Fortitude 31. Reflex 33. W i l l 29 Perception +17
Speed 10 (forest walk), fly 14 Darkvision
Resist 1S poison
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
12.000 .^f t J i i
0 Poisonous Wounds (poison) • Aura 1
While the dragon is bloodied, any enemy that ends its turn
in the aura takes ongoing 10 poison damage (save ends). This
damage increases to 20 if that enemy is bloodied.
Action Recovery
Whenever the dragon ends its turn, any dazing, stunning, or dominating
effect on it ends.
Instinctive Flyby
On an initiative of 10 + its initiative check, the dragon can use a free action to use flyby attack.
During the movement from flyby attack, the dragon gains a +4 bonus to all defenses against
opportunity attacks. If the dragon cannot use a free action to make this attack due to a dominating
or stunning effect, then that effect ends instead of the dragon making the attack.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite (poison) • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature): +24 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 14 damage, and ongoing 10 poison damage (save ends).
Miss: 10 poison damage.
H I H H ^ ^ H H t a H H H H f l H H H H H H H H H H H H H M H H
Attack: Melee 3 (one or two creatures); +24 vs. AC. If the dragon targets only one creature, it can
make this attack twice against that creature.
Hit: 3d8 + 13 damage, and the dragon shifts up to 2 squares.
<r Breath Weapon (poison) • Recharge X] (ll)
Attack: Close blast S (enemies in the blast); +22 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d12 + 12 poison damage, and the target is slowed and takes ongoing 15 poison damage
(save ends both).
Aftereffect: The target is slowed (save ends).
+ <- Flyby Attack • Recharge X ! i
Effect: The dragon flies up to 10 squares and uses bite or breath weapon (if the power is
recharged) at any point during the move.
MINOR ACTIONS
<- Luring Glare (charm) • At Will
Attack: Close blast 10 (one creature in the blast): +22 vs. Will
Hit: The dragon slides the target up to 3 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<• Cunning Glance • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy shifts to a square within 2 squares ofthe dragon.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The dragon uses luring glare against the triggering enemy.
<- Bloodied Breath • Encounter
Trigger: The dragon is first bloodied.
Effect (Free Action): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses it.
Skills Bluff+21. Insight +17, Stealth +21
Str 22 (+15) Dex 25 (+16) Wis 16 (+12)
Con 20(+14) Int 16(+12) Cha14(+11)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
© Core (lightning) • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +25 vs. AC.
Hit: 4d12 + 16 lightning damage.
\ Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one or two creatures); +25 vs. AC. If the dragon targets only one creature, it can
make this attack twice against that creature.
Hit: 4d8 + 13 damage.
-J5- Lightning Burst (lightning) • At Will
Attack: Area burst 2 within 20 (creatures in the burst); +25 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d12 + 13 lightning damage.
Miss: Half damage.
<- Breath Weapon (lightning) • Recharge g] IB
Attack: Close blast 20 (up to three creatures in the blast); +25 vs. Reflex.
Hit: 4d12 + 16 lightning damage, and the target is dazed (save ends).
Miss: Half damage.
->,'c Thunderclap (thunder) • Recharge [X] (Fl]
Attack: Area burst 3 within 20 (creatures in the burst); +25 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 4d6 + 12 thunder damage, and the target is stunned until the end of the dragon's next turn.
Miss: Half damage, and the target is dazed until the end of the dragon's next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<- Wing Backblast • At Will
Trigger: An enemy hits the dragon with a melee attack.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Close burst 3 (enemies in the burst); +23 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target falls prone.
Effect: The dragon flies up to half its speed. This movement does not provoke opportunity
attacks.
<r Bloodied Breath • Encounter
Trigger: The dragon is first bloodied.
Effect (Free Action): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses it.
Skills Athletics +22. Insight +18
Str 25 (+17) Dex 16 (+13) Wis 17 (+13)
Con 21 (+1S) Int 15 (+12) Cha 16 (+13)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
TRAITS
STANDARD ACTIONS
HP 756: Bloodied 378
AC 34. Fortitude 33. Reflex 30. Will 30
Speed 10. fly 12
Resist 15 lightning
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
Initiative +13
Perception +18
Darkvision
Elder Blue Dragon Level 20 Solo A r t i l l e ry
Huge natural magical beast (dragon) XP 14,000 r f y 7/ ^y <R" "I A
0 Uncontained Lightning (lightning) • Aura 5
While the dragon is bloodied, any enemy that ends its turn
in the aura takes 10 lightning damage.
Action Recovery
Whenever the dragon ends its turn, any dazing, stunning, or
dominating effect on it ends.
Instinctive Lightning
On an initiative of 10 + its initiative check, the dragon can use a free action to fly up to its speed
and use lightning burst. This movement does not provoke opportunity attacks. If the dragon
cannot use a free action to make this attack due to a dominating or stunning effect, then that
effect ends instead of the dragon making the attack.
Elder Red Dragon Level 22 Solo Soldier
Huge natural magical beast (dragon) XP 20,750
HP 832: Bloodied 416
AC 38, Fortitude 36, Reflex 33. Will 32
Speed 8, fly 10
Resist 20 fire
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
TRAITS
Initiative +18
Perception +19
Darkvision
Action Recovery
Whenever the dragon ends its turn, any dazing, stunning, or
dominating effect on it ends.
Instinctive Assault
On an initiative of 10 + its initiative check, the dragon can use a
free action to use bite or claw. If the dragon cannot use a free action to
make this attack due to a dominating or stunning effect, then that effect
ends instead ofthe dragon making the attack.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite (fire) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +27 vs. AC.
Hit: 2d10 + 6 damage. The target is grabbed and takes ongoing 15 fire damage, or ongoing 25
fire damage if the dragon is bloodied, until the grab ends (escape DC 30).
+ Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one or two creatures); +27 vs. AC. If the dragon targets only one creature, it can
make this attack twice against that creature.
Hit: 3d10 + 14 damage, and the dragon grabs the target (escape DC 27) if it has fewer than two
creatures grabbed.
>T Immolate Foe (fire) • Recharge [X] [[i
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +25 vs. Reflex
Hit: 4d10 + 7 fire damage, and ongoing 20 fire damage (save ends).
Miss: Half damage, and ongoing 10 fire damage (save ends).
<- Breath Weapon (fire) • Recharge [X] H
Attack: Close blast 5 (creatures in the blast); +25 vs. Reflex
Hit: 4d12 + 17 fire damage.
Miss: Half damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Tail Strike • At Will
Trigger: An enemy leaves a square within 3 squares ofthe dragon.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Melee 4 (triggering enemy); +25 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage, and the target falls prone.
<- Bloodied Breath • Encounter
Trigger: The dragon is first bloodied.
Effect (Free Action): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses it.
Skills Bluff+17. Insight +18
Str 26 (+19) Dex 21 (+16) Wis 17 (+14)
Con 24 (+18) Int 14 (+13) Cha 1S (+13)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
r T7?
(Left to right) red dragon, white dragon, dracolich doomlord
Dracoliches: Long-lived though they are, dragons can die. Yet even when
their heartbeats falter, some dragons remain in the world, active and malicious,
fueled by necrotic energy instead of blood. Through a powerful ritual, a few
dragons become dracoliches. Some dragons choose this fate rather than death,
while others are subjected to the ritual by worshipers ofTiamat or Vecna who
seek a powerful thrall that can champion their cause.
"The older they get, the more like their terrible god they
become."
—Jothan Ironspell
A chromatic dragon that becomes a dracolich tends to pursue the same goals it
possessed in life: destruction, dominance, and treasure. The process of becoming
a dracolich can drive a dragon toward new evil, though. Not only is a dracolich
an unholy terror, it is a fiendishly intelligent tyrant that lays complex webs of
foul schemes. A dracolich employs loyal intermediaries motivated by greed and
a lust for power. It is especially difficult to overcome, because aside from the
normal challenges associated with killing a dragon or a lit h. it often acts from the
shadows and keeps an array of backup plans.
711 1 " ---- - i /
Dracolich Doomlord Level 22 Solo Controller
Huge natural magical beast (dragon, undead) XP 20,750 j 7s
HP 840; Bloodied 420 Initiative +18
AC 36. Fortitude 35. Reflex 34. Will 32 Perception +21
Speed 8, fly 10 (clumsy) Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 15 necrotic;
Vulnerable 10 radiant
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
O Aura of Doom • Aura 3
Enemies cannot regain hit points or gain temporary hit points
while in the aura.
Action Recovery
Whenever the dragon ends its turn, any dazing, stunning, or dominating^
effect on it ends.
Instinctive Domination
On an initiative of 10 + its initiative check, the dragon can use a free action to use mesmerizing
glance. This attack does not provoke opportunity attacks. If the dragon cannot use a free action
to make this attack due to a dominating or stunning effect, then that effect ends instead of the
dragon making the attack.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite (necrotic) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +27 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 8 damage, and ongoing 10 necrotic damage (save ends).
+ Claws • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one or two creatures); +27 vs. AC. If the dracolich targets only one creature, it
can make this attack twice against that creature.
Hit: 3d8 + 16 damage.
Effect: The dracolich slides the target up to 2 squares.
<- Breath Weapon (necrotic) • Recharge X 11
Attack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +25 vs. Reflex
Hit: Sd12 + 14 necrotic damage, and the target is weakened (save ends).
Miss: Half damage, and the target is weakened until the end of its next turn.
Effect: Each target loses any necrotic resistance (save ends).
MINOR ACTIONS
^r Mesmerizing Glance (charm) • At Will (1/round)
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +25 vs. Will
Hit: The the target is dominated (save ends).
Effect: The dracolich slides the target up to 2 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<- Bloodied Breath • Encounter
Trigger: The dragon is first bloodied.
Effect (Free Action): Breath weapon recharges, and the dragon uses it.
Skills Insight +21
Str 27 (+19) Dex 24 (+18) Wis 20 (+16)
Con 26 (+19) Int 18 (+15) Cha 17 (+14)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
ItUAI.I IkJ
DRAGONBORN
Dragonborn are humanoids that share physicalfeatures with dragons. The race once
ruled over the Empire of Arkhosia. but its numbers have now dwindled. The dragonborn
that live today are scattered throughout the towns and villages of other races.
Most dragonborn arc honorable warriors or powerful spellcasters who share
ties to dragons. Despite having no communities of their own, dragonborn retain
strong cultural traditions.
Honor Bound: A dragonborn lives by a code of honor that influences all
aspects of his or her life. This code promotes loyalty to one's family and clan, so
a dragonborn is very protective of allies and clan members. The code doesn't
demand virtue, but it docs encourage respect for one's enemies and victory
through honorable combat.
Draconic Affinity: Dragonborn share a connection to dragons beyond just
their physical appearance. Most dragonborn consider their draconic heritage
a fundamental part of what makes their race unique. As a result, a dragonborn
often has a personality that reflects the characteristics of dragons, such as being
strong-willed, confident, independent, proud, or fearless.
Dragonborn Mercenary Level 2 Skirmisher .
Medium natural humanoid XP 125 /
HP 38; Bloodied 19 Initiative +6 J F
AC 16. Fortitude 13. Reflex 14. Will 14 Perception +2 V
Speed 6 5
TRAITS
Skirmish
If the dragonborn ends a move on its turn at least 4 squares from where it started the move, it
deals 1d6 extra damage with melee attacks until the start of its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Battleaxe (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Mclcc 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC, or +8 vs. AC while the dragonborn is bloodied.
Hit: 1d10 + 4 damage, and the dragonborn shifts up to 2 squares.
+ Overwhelming Strike (weapon) • Encounter
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 4 damage, and the target grants combat advantage (save ends).
Miss: Half damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
<* Dragon Breath (lightning) • Encounter
Attack: Close blast 3 (creatures in the blast); +S vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d6 + 2 lightning damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Tactical Withdrawal • Encounter
Trigger. The dragonborn is bloodied.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The dragonborn shifts up to 3 squares.
Str 18 (+5) Dex 16 (+4) Wis 13 (+2)
Con 14 (+3) Int 8 (+0) Cha 10 (+1)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Draconic
Equipment hide armor, battleaxe
X f ) 1 U J I M I I . I K A . J
Dragonborn Soldier
Medium natural humanoid
Level 5 Soldier .
XP 200 /
HP 63; Bloodied 31
AC 21, Fortitude 18. Reflex 16. Will 15
Speed 5
Initiative +6
Perception +3 1 FFFIM/
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Longsword (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC, or +11 vs. AC while the dragonborn is bloodied.
Hit: 1d8 + 9 damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
<- Dragon Breath (cold) • Encounter
Attack: Close blast 3 (creatures in the blast); +8 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d6 + 4 cold damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Impetuous Spirit (weapon) • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy leaves a square adjacent to the dragonborn.
Effect (Immediate Interrupt): The dragonborn uses longsword against the triggering enemy.
4 Martial Recovery • Recharge when the dragonborn uses impetuous spirit
Trigger: The dragonborn misses an enemy with longsword.
Effect (Free Action): The dragonborn uses longsword against the triggering enemy again.
Str 16 (+5) Dex 15 (+4) Wis 12 (+3)
Con 1S (+4) Int 11 (+2) Cha 9 (+1)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Draconic
Equipment scale armor, light shield, longsword
DRAKE
Whether wild or domesticated, drakes are fierce and clever foes. They come in many
shapes and sizes, and they sometimes serve as guards for those who have the patience and
resilience to train them.
Drakes are reptilian beasts that have claws, fangs, and tails. They're similar to
domesticated mammals but have a reputation for toughness and ferocity that few
tame animals share. Although a guard
drake might seem as threatening as a
wolf, its disposition is more alien and
unpredictable. People fear drakes
because their appearance is reminiscent
of dragons. A drake lunges at
anything that threatens it or its master,
and a drake never backs down from
a fight.
Part of Civilization: Trappers
collect drakes to sell or train, bringing
the creatures into settlements. Drakes
are more expensive than other domesticated
beasts, but most buyers believe
the drakes' ferocity and power merits
the extra cost. Drakes usually appear
in communities that border wilderness or in the camps of tribal humanoids such
as goblins, ores, lizardfolk, elves, and shifters. Only physically weak drakes, such
as pseudodragons, serve as pets. Other drakes require more discipline and are
best treated as pack animals or guardians.
Guard drakes, pseudodragons, and bloodseeker drakes are the most common
types of drakes in humanoid communities. A guard drake lives up to its name by
serving as a sentinel or an attack animal. A pseudodragon might be pampered
as the pet of a wealthy noble or as the familiar of a spellcaster. One might also
"Most drakes aren't
naturally vicious. Ferocious
hunters, yes, but not mean.
But it's hard to train a
drake without also teaching
it to be something far worse
than it was in nature"
—Vadariia, druid of
the Harkenwood
G u a r d D r a ke
Small natural beast (reptile)
Level 2 B r u te
XP 125
STANDARD ACTIONS
HP 48; Bloodied 24
AC 15, Fortitude 15, Reflex 13, W i l l 12
Speed 6
Initiative +3
Perception +7
© Bite •At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 1 d10 + 3 damage, or 1 d10 + 9 while the drake is within 2 squares of an ally.
Str 16 (+4) Dex 15 (+3) Wis 12 (+2)
Con 18 (+5) Int 3 (-3) Cha 12 (+2)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
b r Mimsli is /\ 7
Spitting Drake Level 3 A r t i l l e ry
Medium natural beast (reptile) XP150 At
HP 38; Bloodied 19 Initiative +5
AC 17. Fortitude 14. Reflex 16. Will 14 Perception +3
Speed 7
Resist 10 acid
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 4 damage.
^ Caustic Spit (acid) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +8 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d6 + 4 acid damage.
Str 14 (+3) Dex 18 (+5) Wis 14 (+3)
Con 14 (+3) Int 3 (-3) Cha 12 (+2)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Pseudodragon Level 3 Lurker
Small natural beast (reptile) XP 1 SO
TT>—-A
HP 40: Bloodied 20 Initiative +9
AC 17, Fortitude 14. Reflex 15. Will 14 Perception+8 ' ma speed 4, tly 8 (hover) Y^. j y y 1
STANDARD ACTIONS __
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature): +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 4 damage.
Effect: The pseudodragon flies up to 4 squares. This movement does not provoke opportunity
attacks.
© Sting (poison) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature that cannot see the pseudodragon); +6 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 1d8 + 4 damage, and ongoing S poison damage (save ends).
Invisibility (illusion) • Recharge when the pseudodragon takes damage
Effect: The pseudodragon becomes invisible until it hits or misses with an attack.
Skills Insight +8, Stealth +10
Str 8 (+0) Dex 18 (+5) Wis 15 (+3)
Con 16 (+4) Int 9 (+0) Cha 17 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Draconic
encounter a pseudodragon on the outskirts of a town, scavenging for scraps of
food. A bloodseeker drake performs the task of a bloodhound. They are prized by
trackers and lawbringers who use them to hunt down quarry.
Wild at Heart: The most powerful drakes are difficult to tame and rarely
show up in captivity. These drakes live in dens and hunt in the surrounding
regions. One example is the rage drake, which is violent and hostile to most creatures.
A rage drake attacks any creature that intrudes in its lair or stumbles into
lis hunting grounds. Although a rage drake can be domesticated when raised
from an early age, even then the creature is unstable and dangerous. Ambush
drakes roam the plains, setting upon caravans, travelers, and sometimes small
settlements. They lust for the taste of humanoid flesh and will gnaw on victims
while the creatures are still conscious.
Bloodseeker Drake Level 4 Soldier S i
Medium natural beast (reptile) XP 175 / r
HP 53; Bloodied 26
AC 20. Fortitude 15. Reflex 17. Will 15
Speed 6
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +7
Perception +7
CO Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 5 damage, or I d IO + 10 against a bloodied target.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Blood Frenzy • At Will
Trigger: A bloodied enemy adjacent to the drake shifts.
Effect (Opportunity Action): The drake uses bite against the triggering enemy.
Str 13 (+3) Dex 17 (+5) Wis 10(+2)
Con 13 (+3) Int 2 (-2) Cha 13 (+3)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Rage Drake
Large natural beast (mount, reptile)
Level S Brute
XP 200
HP 77; Bloodied 38 Initiative +3 I f
AC 17. Fortitude 18. Reflex IS. Will 16 Perception +4 I T
Speed 8 It
TRAITS
Raging Mount (mount)
While the drake is bloodied, its rider gains a +2 bonus to attack
rolls and damage rolls with melee attacks.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC, or +12 vs. AC while the drake is bloodied
Hit: 2d10 + 5 damage, or 2d10 + 7 while the drake is bloodied,
j Raking Charge • At Will
Effect: The drake charges and makes the following attack twice against the target of its charge in
place of a melee basic attack.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC, or +12 vs. AC while the drake is bloodied
Hit: 1d6 + 4 damage, or 1d6 + 6 while the drake is bloodied.
Str 19 (+6) Dex 13 (+3) Wis 14 (+4)
Con 17 (+5) Int 3 (-2) Cha 12 (+3)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Social Creatures: Drakes are social creatures that prefer the company of
other drakes. Drakes form packs with their kin or submit to the dominance of
a master they regard as the pack leader. Although a drake can't speak, it might
attempt to communicate by growling, chirping, roaring, purring, or hissing. A
more intelligent drake, such as a pseudodragon, can convey complex messages
through sounds and movement. A lone drake might seek friendship from anyone
who happens upon it. Although drakes desire companionship, none are truly
loyal. If a drake grows too hungry, it might devour a packmatc or its master.
b r .1... A /
Ambush Drake
Medium natural beast (reptile)
HP 71; Bloodied 35
AC 20, Fortitude 19. Reflex 18. Will 16
Speed 6, fly 4 (clumsy)
STANDARD ACTIONS
(?) Claws • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage.
I Shifting Strike • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage.
Effect: The drake can shift 1 square before or after the attack.
MINOR ACTIONS
Ravenous • At-Will
Requirement: The drake must be bloodied.
I //<•< t: The drake shifts up to 2 squares to a square closer to a bloodied enemy.
Skills Stealth +10
Sir 16 (+6) Dex 14 (+5) Wis 11 (+3)
C on IS (+S) Int 3 (-1) Cha6(+1)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
I I U A k l f H'»
DRIDER
I'oul creatures of the Underdark, driders are halfdrow and half spider. They are devoted
servants of the dark goddess Lolth, who elevated them from drow and gave them new
physical forms to resemble her own.
Driders have the torso and upper body of a drow, and many retain their drow
traits, such as the power to create clouds of darkness and to outline their foes
in fire. A driders lower body is that of a massive spider, giving the creature the
ability to climb walls and spin webs. A drow warrior considers the presence of
a drider to be a good omen. Most warriors believe that becoming a drider is the
pinnacle of one's life. The transformation into a drider infuses a warrior with a
bloodthirsty and savage nature, leading it to be even more violent and pitiless
than drow already are.
Champions of the Drow: Among the drow, driders are highly honored and
have their own social caste outside drow society. They are both respected and
feared; drow view them as manifestations of Lolth's will that function as champions,
spies, and assassins. Before its transformation, a drider is already a powerful
warrior who has proved fearless and deadly in battle. A renowned drow warrior
might disappear one day, to emerge the next as a drider. Despite the driders'
near-mythical status within drow society, all these creatures remain beholden to
TRAITS
Drider
Large fey humanoid (spider), drow
HP 138; Bloodied 69
AC 30. Fortitude 27, Reflex 25. Will 26
Speed 8. climb 8 (spider climb)
Level 14 Soldier
XP 1,000
Initiative +13
Perception+7 |
H i l l u i t i n n V
Threatening Reach
The drider can make opportunity attacks against all enemies
within 2 squares of it.
HWI.M=I.IJIJI.IH
© Scimitar (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 + 9 damage.
Effect: The drider marks the target until the end of the driders next turn.
MINOR ACTIONS
•y Darkfire • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +17 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target grants combat advantage and cannot benefit from invisibility or concealment
until the end of the driders next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Servant's Rebuke (necrotic, poison) • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy marked by the drider shifts or makes an attack that doesn't include it as a
target.
Effect (Opportunity Action): Close burst 10 (triggering enemy in the burst). The target takes 15
necrotic and poison damage.
Skills Stealth +16
Str 23 (+13) Dex 18 (+11) Wis 11 (+7)
Con 18 (+11) Int 8 (+6) Cha 20 (+12)
Alignment evil Languages Elven
Equipment leather armor, scimitar
priestesses of Lolth. Many driders chafe at the control the priestesses exert, but
none yet have had the power and the following to defy them.
Spider Affinity: Driders have an affinity for spiders, as evidenced by
their half-spider bodies. This affinity goes beyond physical similarity, though.
Some driders can communicate with spiders through a kind of telepathy, and
they might use spiders as spies, scouts, or combat troops. Many driders feel at
home more among spiders than among drow. A drider might become a recluse
that lives in the caves outside a drow city, emerging only at the command of
Lolth's priestesses. A drider's lair consists of narrow tunnels, each barely wide
enough for the drider to squeeze through. The webs of thousands of spiders fill
these tunnels. A drider relies on the spiders to incapacitate prey or to alert it
of intruders. Although most spiders lack the intelligence to perform complex
tasks, driders who have mastered arcane magic can summon intelligent spiders
from other planes, such as the Demonweb Pits, the layer of the Abyss where
Lolth dwells.
Drlder Shadowspinner Level 14 Skirmisher
Large fey humanoid (spider), drow XP 1,000
HP 134; Bloodied 67
AC 28. Fortitude 24. Reflex 27, Will 26
Speed 8, climb 8 (spider climb)
Initiative +12
Perception+14
Darkvision f
Combat Advantage (necrotic)
The drider deals 2d6 extra necrotic damage against any target
granting combat advantage to it.
Shifting Shadows
If the drider ends a move on its turn at least 3 squares from where
it started the move, it gains partial concealment until the end of its
next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Short Sword (necrotic, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 + 9 necrotic damage, and the drider ends any mark on it and can shift 1 square,
^r Slashing Darkness (necrotic) • At Will
Attack: Ranged S (one creature); +17 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d8 + 7 necrotic damage.
^T Web • Recharge :j](X ••!
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +17 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target is restrained until it escapes (DC 21) or teleports.
MINOR ACTIONS
Cloud of Darkness (zone) • Encounter
Effect: Close burst 1. The burst creates a zone that lasts until the end of the drider's next turn.
The cloud blocks line of sight for all creatures except the drider. Any creature other than the
drider is blinded while entirely within the cloud.
•Y Darkfire • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +17 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target grants combat advantage and cannot benefit from invisibility or concealment
until the end of the drider's next turn.
Skills Dungeoneering +14, Stealth +15
Str 13 (+8) Dex 17 (+10) Wis 14 (+9)
Con 14 (+9) Int 12 (+8) Cha 17 (+10)
Alignment evil Languages Elven
Equipment leather armor, short sword
"Cursed? I'm afraid not. In this form, I wield more power
than I could have imagined before the Test. As you shall
soon see, Lolth has blessed me richly."
—Azarax, drider of Erelhei-Cinlu
SR
Level 14 Brute
XP 1,000
Initiative +12
Perception +15
Darkvision
Drider Fanglord
Large fey humanoid (spider), drow
HP 172; Bloodied 86
AC 26. Fortitude 27. Reflex 25. Will 23
Speed 8. climb 8 (spider climb)
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Greatsword (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 3d12 + 8 damage.
Web • Recharge [H] ISO GOO
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +17 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target is restrained until it escapes (DC 21) or teleports.
iSI
I
4 Quick Bite (poison) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature granting combat advantage to the drider); +17 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d4 damage, and ongoing 10 poison damage (save ends).
Darkfire • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +17 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target grants combat advantage and cannot benefit from invisibility or concealment
until the end of the drider's next turn.
Skills Dungeoneering +15, Stealth +17
Str 24 (+14) Dex 21 (+12) Wis 16 (+10)
Con 22 (+13) Int 13 (+8) Cha 9 (+6)
Alignment evil Languages Elven
Equipment leather armor, greatsword
The Test of Lolth: After a drow warrior has proven himself or herself to
possess exemplary prowess and bravery, a priestess of Lolth allows the warrior
to undertake the Test of Lolth-a grueling and painful magical ritual that transforms
the drow into a drider. Many drow don't survive this process, succumbing
to the mental or physical torment. The details of the Test of Lolth are carefully
guarded by the priestesses. Although a renegade drow might, on occasion,
attempt to steal or record the secrets of the ritual, no one has yet managed to
survive the wrath of the priestesses. Many factions within drow society covet the
knowledge of this test. They hope to unlock its secrets and, in doing so, gain the
ability to create legions of drider warriors that could upset the balance of power
and break the priestesses' control. For their part, driders have little to say about
the test, preferring to keep its secret so that they continue to be rare and honored
within drow culture.
DRYAD
Normally shy and reclusive, dryads live in out-of-the-way. untouched forests, appearing
only when intruders from civilization threaten their homes. When that happens, these
temperamental creatures lash out with primal magic and the strength of oaks.
As unpredictable and inscrutable as the weather, dryads live only in the wild and
refuse to make homes in cities or other settlements. Even an eladrin city, which is
entwined within trees, frightens or
angers a dryad. Dryads prefer to live in
dark, thickly forested areas. They can
merge with great trees, and each dryad
has one tree that it calls home. It's not
always easy to identify a dryad's tree or
grove, though. Some people say dryads'
groves are darker than other nearby
areas of the forest: others claim that
the sky turns green when you near one
ofthem.
A dryad is deeply protective of
its home. A dryad will die fighting to
protect the forest, though sometimes
it is driven away by forces it cannot vanquish. Other times, a dryad awakens after
a long, deep slumber to discover that its forest is being ravaged by lumbering. A
"As beautiful and welcoming
as a sunlit glade in high
summer, as terrifying and
deadly as a winter gale
sweeping through a barren
forest—that's a dryad. In
the space of moments."
—Galados of Celduilon
Level 5 Lurker
Initiative +10
Perception +10 iM
Dryad Recluse
Medium fey humanoid (plant)
HP SO: Bloodied 2S
AC 19. Fortitude 16. Reflex 18. Will 17
Speed 8 (forest walk)
STANDARD ACTIONS
0 Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 6 damage.
>r Sylvan Charm (charm) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +8 vs. Will
Hit: The dryad pulls the target up to 5 squares to a square adjacent to it. The target is charmed
until it is no longer adjacent to the dryad or until the dryad uses this power again. A charmed
creature is immobilized and can't attack the dryad. When an enemy's melee or ranged attack
hits the dryad, it deals half damage to the dryad and half damage to the charmed creature. If
the attacker is adjacent to the charmed creature, the charmed creature must make a melee
basic attack (of the dryad's choice) against the enemy as a free action.
MOVE ACTIONS
Treestride (teleportation) • At-Will
Requirement: The dryad must be adjacent to a tree or a Large plant.
Effect: The dryad teleports up to 8 squares to a square adjacent to a tree or a Large plant. Any
creature charmed by the dryad teleports with the dryad to a square adjacent to it.
MINOR ACTIONS
Deceptive Veil (illusion) • At-Will
Effect: The dryad disguises itself to appear as a Medium humanoid (usually a beautiful elf or
eladrin) until it uses deceptive veil again or until it drops to 0 hit points. Other creatures can
make a DC 27 Insight check to discern that the form is an illusion.
Str 12 (+3) Dex 19 (+6) Wis 16 (+S)
Con 14 (+4) Int 12 (+3) Cha 13 (+3)
Alignment unaligned Languages Elven
dryad that undergoes such trauma can become a heartless creature intent only on
inflicting pain on any who trespass in its demesne.
Fey Magic: Dryads wield the ancient and unfathomable magic of the Feywild,
which gives them power over plants and mortals alike. A dryad has the ability to
influence the mind of its foe, luring the prey into a dangerous patch of flora or olT
a deadly precipice. Most dryads have some talent for illusion. Using its deceptive
veil, a dryad can appear as an elf or an eladrin maiden who has hair like orange
autumn leaves or green spring blossoms. Anyone who draws close to the veiled
creature soon discovers that the dryad's disguised thorny claws are very real.
Fear and Allure: The dichotomy of nature-its capacity for both sublime
beauty and violent destruction—echoes in the form of dryads. When calm and
serene, or when masked by its deceptive veil, a dryad is a creature of beauty and
grace. When angered, though, a dryad can be a deadly deceiver or a storm of
claws. When one townsperson recounts seeing a beautiful maiden in the forest
and another describes being chased from the woods by a shrieking tree-creature,
il is possible that the two describe the same dryad. A dryad's ability to both captivate
and frighten has gained the creature a reputation throughout the land as
being both a blessing and a curse.
Quick to Anger: Fey arc often characterized as fickle creatures. A dryad,
however, is better characterized as rash or impulsive. The smallest threat or
slight can anger a dryad. When intruders approach a dryad's glade or grove,
the creature uses any means to drive off or kill the trespassers. A dryad might
provide misleading directions, lead the interlopers into traps, or misdirect them
to the den of nearby monsters. Other dryads simply charge forward and attack,
nourishing the tree roots with the blood of their victims. Once a dryad decides
an intruder must die, nothing can dissuade it. Nonetheless, it's possible to reason
with a dryad and prevent combat. Anyone who wants to speak with a dryad must
approach a grove slowly and avoid harming the forest. Once they are confronted,
those wishing to speak to the dryad must make their intentions clear. A dryad
might accept offerings as a sign of good faith, including nature rituals or the saplings
or seeds of rare trees.
Friends of the Wild: Dryads fight alongside other plant creatures and forest
denizens. They share an innate bond with natural flora and fauna. A dryad
can quickly learn about a disturbance in the forest, even one that occurred
many miles away. A dryad sometimes fights alongside eladrin or other civilized
races, but only when it believes a danger to the forest merits such an allegiance.
Although most dryads are solitary creatures, they exhibit great unity in times
of war. If a group of dryads is aiding in a battle, it might leave if even one ofthe
group finds the actions of its civilized allies to be offensive.
Dryad Hunter
Medium fey humanoid (plant)
Level 7 Skirmisher
XP 300
HP 82: Bloodied 41
AC 21. Fortitude 20. Reflex 20. Will 18
Speed 8 (forest walk)
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +9
Perception +10
7I/ tI t
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature): +12 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 6 damage, or 3d8 + 8 if no other enemy is adjacent to the dryad.
4 Luring Feint • At Will
Effect: The dryad uses claw. If the attack hits, the dryad shifts up to 4 squares, pulling the target
with it. If the attack misses, the dryad shifts up to its speed.
MOVE ACTIONS
Treestride (teleportation) • At Will
Requirement: The dryad must be adjacent to a tree or a Large plant.
Effect: The dryad teleports up to 8 squares to a square adjacent to a tree or a Large plant.
MINOR ACTIONS
Deceptive Veil (illusion) • At-Will
Effect: The dryad disguises itself to appear as a Medium humanoid (usually a beautiful elf or
eladrin) until it uses deceptive veil again or until it drops to 0 hit points. Other creatures can
make a DC 28 Insight check to discern that the form is an illusion.
Str 16 (+6) Dex 18 (+7) Wis I S (+S)
Con 18 (+7) Int 10 (+3) Cha 13 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages Elven
' ) ) 1 il.lM.I.' •. *-/
Dryad W i t c h Level 8 Controller /
Medium fey humanoid (plant) XP 350 fy
HP 84; Bloodied 42
AC 22. Fortitude 18. Reflex 20. Will 22
Speed 8 (forest walk)
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +7
Perception +14
©Thorny Vine • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage.
Effect: The dryad can slide the target 1 square.
>T Beguiling Verdure (charm) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one dazed creature); +11 vs. Will
Hit: The dryad slides the target up to the target's speed, and the target must then make a basic
attack as a free action against a creature of the dryad's choice.
<- Soporific Fragrance (charm) • Recharge [:: X I !
Attack: Close blast 3 (enemies in the blast); +11 vs. Will
Hit: The target is dazed (save ends).
Movt ACTIONS
Treestride (teleportation) • At Will
Requirement: The dryad must be adjacent to a tree or a Large plant.
Effect: The dryad teleports up to 8 squares to a square adjacent to a tree or a Large plant.
MINOR ACTIONS
Deceptive Veil (illusion) • At Will
Effect: The dryad disguises itself to appear as a Medium humanoid (usually a beautiful elf or
eladrin) until it uses deceptive veil again or until it drops to 0 hit points. Other creatures can
make a DC 29 Insight check to discern that the form is an illusion.
Str 11 (+4) Dex 17 (+7) Wis 20 (+9)
Con 12 (+5) Int 12 (+5) Cha 16 (+7)
Alignment unaligned Languages Elven
Bough D r y a d Level 15 Minion Skirmisher
Medium fey humanoid (plant) XP 300
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion.
AC 29. Fortitude 28. Reflex 28. Will 26
Speed 8 (forest walk)
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +16
Perception +17
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature): +20 vs. AC
Hit: 11 damage, or 13 if no other enemy is adjacent to the dryad.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Boon of Life
Trigger: The dryad drops to 0 hit points.
Effect (No Action): Close burst 5 (one ally in the burst). The target gains 5 temporary hit points.
Str 21 (+12) Dex 24 (+14) Wis 21 (+12)
Con 24 (+14) Int 11 (+7) Cha 17 (+10)
Alignment unaligned Languages Elven
DUERGAR
I lir duergar are slavers that dwell in volcanic regions of the Underdark. They were once
the thralls of mind flayers, but they turned to devils to help escape from bondage. Now,
they acquire their own slaves by making raids into the surface world.
STANDARD ACTIONS
MINOR ACTIONS
Duergar Scout
Medium natural humanoid. dwarf
Level 4 Lurker
XP 17S
TRAITS
Shadow Attack
The duergar scout's attacks deal 4d6 extra damage when the scout hits a target that cannot see it.
© Warhammer (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1 dl 0 + 4 damage.
® Crossbow (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + S damage.
Underdark Sneak • At Will
Effect: The scout becomes invisible until the end of its next turn or until it hits or misses with an
attack.
® Infernal Quills (poison) • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 3 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 4 damage, and the target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls and ongoing S poison
damage (save ends both).
Skills Dungeoneering +9, Stealth +9
Str 13 (+3) Dex 15 (+4) Wis 14 (+4)
Con 18 (+6) Int 10 (+2) Cha 8 (+1
Alignment evil Languages Common, Deep Speech, Dwarven
Equipment chainmail, warhammer, crossbow
The dwarves that suffered generations of servitude under the brutal mind flayers
became duergar after they turned to the devils to help them gain their freedom.
Believing that Moradin had abandoned them, the dwarves swore dark oaths to
the powers of the Nine Hells, who were only too happy to offer aid in exchange
lor loyalty.
Built on the Backs of Slaves: Duergar have a well-earned reputation as
slavers. They rarely perform exhausting or risky tasks, relying instead on the
work of slaves. A duergar recognizes the value of slaves, though, rarely tasking
them with jobs that are deadly or unlikely to yield a high reward. Most duergar
slavers capture only those who exhibit physical prowess or exceptional skill. A
duergar has no interest in enslaving the young, the sick, or the elderly; such individuals
are often left dead as a result of duergar raids.
HP 48; Bloodied 24
AC 18, Fortitude 18. Reflex 16. Will 16
Speed 5
Resist S fire, 5 poison
Initiative +8
Perception +9
Darkvision
Duergar Guard Level 4 Soldier
Medium natural humanoid XP 175
HP 58: Bloodied 29
AC 20. Fortitude 17. Reflex 15. Will 15
Speed 5
Resist 5 fire. 5 poison
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +6 i'
Perception +4 <
Darkvision
©Warhammer(weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 6 damage.
Effect: The duergar guard marks the target until the end of the target's next turn.
MINOR ACTIONS
Infernal Anger (fire) • Recharge X I i
Effect: Until the start of the guard's next turn, its melee attacks deal 4 extra fire damage, and if
an enemy adjacent to the guard moves, the guard can shift 1 square as an immediate reaction.
® Infernal Quills (poison) • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 3 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 3 damage, and the target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls and ongoing 5 poison
damage (save ends both).
Skills Dungeoneering +9
Str 14 (+4) Dex 15 (+4) Wis 15 (+4)
Con 18 (+6) Int 10 (+2) Cha 8 (+1)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Deep Speech, Dwarven
Equipment chainmail, warhammer
Duergar Thug Level 4 Minion Brute A
Medium natural humanoid XP 44 /
Initiative +4
Perception +4
Darkvision
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion.
AC 16. Fortitude 17. Reflex 15. Will 14
Speed 5
Resist 5 fire, 5 poison
© Warhammer (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 8 damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
© Infernal Quills (poison) • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 3 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 6 damage, and ongoing 2 poison damage (save ends).
Str 14 (+4) Dex 15 (+4) Wis 15 (+4)
Con 18 (+6) Int 10 (-1-2) Cha 8 (+1)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Deep Speech. Dwarven
Equipment chainmail. warhammer
Duergar Raid Leader
Medium natural humanoid
Level 5 A r t i l l e r y (Leader)
XP 200
HP 51: Bloodied 25
AC 19. Fortitude 17. Reflex 19. Will 15
Speed 5
Resist 5 fire, 5 poison
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +3
Perception +4
Darkvision
©Warhammer(weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 5 damage.
® Crossbow (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 8 damage.
Raid Leader's Command • At Will
Effect: Ranged 5 (one ally). The target can make a basic attack as a free action.
MINOR ACTIONS
•Y Infernal Quills (poison) • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 3 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 4 damage, and the target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls and ongoing 5 poison
damage (save ends both).
Skills Dungeoneering +9
Str 11 (+2) Dex 13 (+3) Wis 14 (+4)
Con 15 (+4) Int 18 (+6) Cha 8 (+1)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Deep Speech, Dwarven
Equipment chainmail, warhammer. crossbow
Duergar Infernal Consort Level 17 Controller
Medium natural humanoid XP 1.600 /
HP 164; Bloodied 82 Initiative +8 Ml AC 31. Fortitude 30. Reflex 28. Will 30 Perception +9 ;V Speed S Darkvision
Resist 10 fire. 10 poison I
STANDARD ACTIONS
0 Warhammer (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 9 damage, and the duerger infernal consort pushes the target up to 3 squares. The
target is slowed until the end of the consort's next turn.
® Devil Possession (charm, fire) • Recharge X I i
Attack: Ranged 3 (one creature); +20 vs. Will
Hit: The target is dominated until the end of the consort's next turn. While the target is dominated,
any ally of the target that ends its turn adjacent to the target takes 10 fire damage.
Effect: At the start of the target's next turn, the consort slides the target up to 3 squares as a free
action.
•I!* Infernal Summons (fire, zone) • At-Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 5 (creatures in the burst); +20 vs. Reflex
Hit: 4d6 + 6 fire damage.
Effect: The burst creates a zone of difficult terrain that lasts until the start of the consort's next
turn. Any creature that enters the zone or ends its turn there takes 10 fire damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
® Infernal Quills (poison) • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 3 (one creature); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 6 damage, and the target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls and ongoing 10 poison
damage (save ends both).
Skills Dungeoneering +17, Religion +17
Str 11 (+8) Dex 10 (+8) Wis 13 (+9)
Con 20 (+13) Int 19 (+12) Cha 21 (+13)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Deep Speech, Dwarven
Equipment leather armor, warhammer
A duergar retains a vestige of its dwarven heritage. Other Underdark denizens
often call upon duergar to build keeps, castles, and other structures of
stone. A duergar also employs its slaves to mine valuable substances, such as
gold, platinum, and gems. Usually, a large number of slaves are overseen by a
small number of duergar taskmasters. When the slaves are not working, they are
Ireated like prisoners. A duergar keeps its slaves in defensible structures, discouraging
outsiders from attempting to rescue them.
Consorting with Devils: The duergar embrace their mutually beneficial
agreement with the infernal forces. Many of the fortrcsslike cities that duergar
inhabit have places that serve as embassies for devils. Throughout these cities,
devils travel openly in the streets. Humanoid devils, particularly succubi, are the
most common visitors. Sometimes a powerful devil ascends to power in a duergar
settlement, taking an active hand in the compact with its residents and granting
IYOOIIS in exchange for service.
I I I I I I'A \ I*
A duergar outpost near the surface might host a significant tiefling population.
A tiefling who embraces his or her infernal heritage often allies with
duergar, who use the tiefling as an agent on the surface. A tiefling might become
a member of a surface settlement, identifying choice victims for duergar slavers.
Surface Raiders: A duergar that lives in an outpost near the surface tends to
actively raid settlements. Duergar are commonly sighted in borderland regions,
where few patrols or militias can stand up to their attacks. A duergar living near
the surface usually sells its slaves to markets in the Underdark or trades the
slaves to duergar living deeper underground, where the slaves are more useful.
A duergar slaver often learns the traditions and routines of surface-dwellers,
putting those lessons to practice in its raiding techniques. A duergar raider might
wait until fall harvest to attack, taking advantage of the large number of isolated,
able-bodied workers in the fields.
Fortresses of the Deep: Deep-dwelling duergar make their homes in highly
defensible areas of the Underdark, such as on islands in the middle of underground
seas, in caverns surrounded by moats of lava, or on the edges of deep
chasms. Duergar are typically slow to trust outsiders; an endorsement from a
powerful devil is one of the few ways to gain the trust of a duergar. Duergar are
always wary of attacks from mind flayers, aboleths, and other creatures that
threaten to enslave them once again. Squads of a half-dozen or more soldiers
patrol duergar strongholds, sometimes accompanied by devils or by duergar that
have the psychic talent to detect mind flayers or aboleths. Duergar might seem
defensive or cautious, but they quickly take advantage of their enemies' weaknesses,
whether in combat or in social encounters.
Devil-Bred Duergar Level 18 Minion Soldier /
Medium natural humanoid XP 500
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion.
AC 34. Fortitude 32. Reflex 28. Will 30
Speed 5
) Warhammer (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 13 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Punishing Hammer (fire, weapon) • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy adjacent to the duergar makes an attack that doesn't include it as a target.
Attack (Opportunity Action): Melee 1 (triggering enemy); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 13 fire damage.
Str 20(+14) Dex 14(+11) Wis14(+11)
Con 22 (+15) Int 10 (+9) Cha 8 (+8)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Deep Speech, Dwarven
Equipment chainmail, warhammer
b(ii) r \
HP 364; Bloodied 182
AC 34. Fortitude 32. Reflex 33, Will 31
Speed 7
Resist 10 fire, 10 poison
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
Infernal Animation (healing)
While the duergar underlord is conscious, whenever it starts its turn and no allies within 20
squares of it have at least 1 hit point, one ally within 20 squares returns to life with 1 hit point
and can stand up as a free action. The ally acts immediately after the underlord's turn. The ally
automatically drops to 0 hit points at the end of the encounter.
Warhammer (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +25 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 12 damage.
Effect: Any marking effects on the underlord end. and it shifts up to 3 squares.
4 Battlecrazed Frenzy (weapon) • Recharge X) ll|
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature): +25 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 12 damage, and the underlord shifts up to 2 squares and repeats this attack against
an enemy it has not yet attacked during this turn.
MINOR ACTIONS
® Infernal Quills (poison) • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 3 (one creature); +25 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 5 damage, and the target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls and ongoing 10 poison
damage (save ends both).
Underlord's Command • At-Will (1/round)
Effect: Close burst 10 (one ally in the burst). The target can use a free action to shift up to 3
squares and make a basic attack.
Skills Dungeoneering +20
Str 22 (+16) Dex 26 (+18) Wis 20 (+15)
Con 14 (+12) Int 14 (+12) Cha 16 (+13)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Deep Speech, Dwarven
Equipment chainmail, warhammer
"Don't call them dwarves. They're not, not any more than
a succubus is a human. They're fiends through and
through, and don't ever forget it."
—Boldrik of Hammerfast
I I I I I I X I
DWARF
The industrious and honorable dwarves carve kingdoms from the mountains, creating
glimmering points of light in the darkness of the world. Their realms are strong and vast,
though not all are welcoming of outsiders.
A dwarf'lives for the ring of the smith's hammer and the chink of a chisel on
stone. A dwarf exults in the gush of ale and the clink of coins. A dwarf speaks
solemn oaths and bellows great battle cries. To the din of these sounds, dwarves
live and work.
Masters of Mountains: Long ago, with the aid of their god Moradin, dwarves
freed themselves from the dominion of the giants. Today, dwarven citadels guard
mountain passes against giants and other denizens of the wilderness. These outposts
are important waypoints for trade and travel; they allow dwarves to import
simple products and export fine goods, such as weapons, armor, sculptures,
and ales.
Sworn to the Clan: A dwarf tends to practice his or her clan's traditions
wherever he or she might dwell. A dwarf living in a human city might forge
armor, operate a tavern or brewery, or become a soldier. A dwarf warrior might
shed blood alongside members of another humanoid race, so long as those people
never make enemies of that dwarfs clan.
D w a r f W a r r i or
Medium natural humanoid
Level 1 M i n i o n A r t i l l e ry
XP 25
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +3
AC 15. Fortitude 14. Reflex 12. W i l l 14 Perception +2
Speed 5 Low-light vision
SI
Dwarf Solidarity
The dwarf gains a +4 bonus to AC and Reflex while adjacent to a dwarf ally.
Stand the Ground
The dwarf can move 1 square fewer than the effect specifies when subjected to a pull, a push,
or a slide.
Steady-Footed
The dwarf can make a saving throw to avoid failing prone when an attack would knock it prone.
STANDARD ACTIONS
6T Warhammer (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature): +6 vs. AC
Hit: 4 damage, or 6 while the dwarf is adjacent to a dwarf ally.
<S> Crossbow (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 30 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 4 damage, or 6 against a target that doesn't have cover.
Str 13 (+1) Dex 16 (+3) Wis I S (+2)
Con 15 (+2) Int 10 (+0) Cha 10 (+0)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Dwarven
Equipment chainmail, warhammer, crossbow, 20 bolts
Dwarf Clan Guard Level 1 Soldier
Medium natural humanoid XP 100
HP 33: Bloodied 16 Initiative +3
AC 17. Fortitude 15, Reflex 13. Will 15 Perception +8
Speed 5 Low-light vision
Stand the Ground
The dwarf can move 1 square fewer than the effect specifies when subjected to a pull, a push,
or a slide.
Steady-Footed
The dwarf can make a saving throw to avoid falling prone when an attack would knock it prone.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Warhammer (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 3 damage, and the dwarf can push the target 1 square. The dwarf can then shift 1
square to a square the target vacated.
Effect: The dwarf marks the target until the end of the dwarf's next turn.
Throwing Hammer (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 4 damage, and the dwarf marks the target until the end of the dwarf's next turn.
+ ^T Double Hammer Strike (weapon) • Recharge ::] [X] |l i]
Effect: The dwarf uses warhammer and then uses throwing hammer. The dwarf does not provoke
opportunity attacks for this use of throwing hammer.
Str 16 (+3) Dex 12 (+1) Wis 17 (+3)
Con 17 (+3) Int 10 (+0) Cha 10 (+0)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common. Dwarven
Equipment plate armor, heavy shield, warhammer, 4 throwing hammers
(left to right) dwarf dan guard, dwarf warrior
tl Tun
EFREET
I liese burning elemental lords enslave weaker humanoids, which they put to use in an
effort to expand their dominion. Despite their tyrannical tendencies, efreets adhere to
strict laws and customs, making their settlements rare havens of order within the Elemental
Chaos.
Every efreet has a title-Glorious Sultan of the Eternal Fires. Caliph of the
Burning Thunder. Pasha of the Ciilded Flame. Maharaja of the Ruby Palace-and
each has dozens of slaves. Efreets consider themselves the nobility ofthe Elemental
Chaos. Their intellect and ambition have helped them to amass great wealth
and to create great demesnes, where they can lord over mortals.
Fiery Potentates: Efreets are the self-proclaimed princes of the Elemental
Chaos, and they arc the strongest force of order in the tumultuous plane. Efreets
believe they are the firstborn of the primordials and thus inheritors of the Elemental
Chaos and creation. Despite this claim, an efreet exhibits scant loyalty to
its progenitors. An efreet rarely worships a higher being, and it owes fealty only to
the Lord of the Efreets, who accepts no master and honors only himself. Although
few in number, efreets ride over vast numbers of slaves and soldiers, many of
whom are loyal unto death. Many creatures ofthe Elemental Chaos see service to
an efreet as a great honor, even when such bondage includes punishment.
There are no "efreet commoners." Every efreet belongs to a noble house. These
houses ruthlessly plot and scheme against each other, and from time to time
they muster enormous armies to battle one another. A house might contain only
(I*ft to right) efreetPamest rider, efreet fireblade, and efreet cinderlord
Efreet Fireblade Level 22 Soldier -
Large elemental humanoid (fire) XP 4.150 f.
Initiative +19 #
Perception+18 I
HP 206; Bloodied 103
AC 38. Fortitude 36. Reflex 35. W i l l 33
Speed 6. fly 8 (hover)
Immune fire
O Blazing Soul (fire) • Aura 1
Any enemy that takes ongoing fire damage while in the aura
takes 5 extra fire damage.
Frozen Fire
Whenever the efreet takes cold damage, it is slowed until the end of its
next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Scimitar (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +27 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 +14 damage.
Effect: The efreet marks the target until the end of the efreet's next turn.
Flying Scimitar (weapon) • Recharge X III!
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature or two creatures within 5 squares of each other); +27 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 14 damage.
Effect: The efreet marks each target until the end of the efreet's next turn.
<- Whirling Firesteel Strike (fire, weapon) • Recharge X I !
Attack: Close burst 2 (enemies in the burst): +27 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 14 damage, and ongoing 10 fire damage (save ends).
Skills Bluff+20. Insight +18
Sir 24 (+18) Dex 22 (+17) Wis 15 (+13)
Con 22 (+17) Int 18 (+15) Cha 18 (+15)
Alignment evil Languages Primordial
Equipment scimitar
a small number of efreets, but through power and intimidation, those house
members preside over many other clementals. Their control is not limited to
fire creatures; the most cunning and powerful efreets keep creatures of many
kinds. On rare occasions, an efreet might bind a demon to servitude. An efreet is
shrewd enough not to rely too much on such bound servants, though.
Masters Who Hate Slavery: As creatures of nobility and self-importance,
efreets fear and loathe servitude to others. Sometimes when two efreet houses
clash, the losing side must surrender a junior member of its house to the victor
for a certain amount of time. This loss is far more humiliating and punishing
than lost goods or slain soldiers. An efreet considers being bound to serve a
mortal the worst form of punishment. It burns with resentment against its erstwhile
master, hoping lor an opportunity to exact vengeance.
Citadels of Fire and Gold: Efreets use enslaved creatures and spellcasters
to craft stunning citadels of metal and flames. These citadels become beacons of
stability and trade in the wild and ever-changing furor of the plane. The greatest
jewel among these fortresses is the glittering City of Brass, the seat of the
efreets' power. Unchanging and eternal, the City of Brass occupies a permanent
place in the roiling chaos, and it is there that the Lord of the Efreets rules with
absolute authority.
TRAITS
Efreet Cinderlord
Large elemental humanoid (fire)
HP 169; Bloodied 84
AC 37. Fortitude 34. Reflex 35. W i l l 33
Speed 6. fly 8 (hover)
Immune fire
Level 23 Artillery
XP 5,100
Initiative +19
Perception +15 f l
O Blazing Soul (fire) • Aura 1
Any enemy in the aura that takes ongoing fire damage takes 5
extra fire damage.
Frozen Fire
Whenever the efreet takes cold damage, it is slowed until the end
next turn.
of its
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Scimitar (fire, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +28 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 7 damage, and ongoing 5 fire damage (save ends).
>f Fire Bolt (fire) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +28 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d6 +10 damage, and ongoing 10 fire damage (save ends).
-};- Fan the Flames (fire) • At Will
E/jfect: Close burst 20 (one creature taking ongoing fire damage). The target takes 2d6 + 7 fire
damage, and the efreet makes the following attack centered on the target.
Attack: Area burst 1 within 20 (creatures in the burst); +28 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d6 + 7 fire damage.
^T Curse of the Efreet (fire) • Recharge when first bloodied
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +30 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 +15 fire damage, and ongoing 15 fire damage (save ends). The target cannot benefit
from fire resistance until the end of the encounter.
Miss: Half damage, and ongoing 5 fire damage (save ends).
Skills Bluff+22. Insight +20
Str 24 (+18) Dex 27 (+19) Wis 18 (+15)
Con 25 (+18) Int 16 (+14) Cha 22 (+17)
Alignment evil Languages Primordial
Equipment scimitar
"At the point where an efreet offers to grant your wish,
you're in real trouble. You can refuse, but you'll offend the
efreet's strange sense of hospitality and maybe make a
powerful enemy. Or you can accept, and watch everything
you've ever dreamed of come within your grasp . . . and
then crumble into ash."
—Obanar, guardian of Argent
ti\A 1
Efreet Flamestrider Level 23 Skirmisher
Large elemental Humanoid (fire) XP 5,100 f
HP 217; Bloodied 108 Initiative+20 t
AC 37. Fortitude 36. Reflex 35. Will 34 Perception+15 f
Speed 6, fly 8 (hover) I I •
Immune fire I I
TRAITS \
O Blazing Soul (fire) • Aura 1
Any enemy in the aura that takes ongoing fire damage takes 5
extra fire damage.
Frozen Fire
Whenever the efreet takes cold damage, it is slowed and can teleport only
5 squares using/ire step until the end of its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
® Quarterstaff (fire, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +28 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 +10 damage, and ongoing 10 fire damage (save ends).
3T Fiery Grasp (fire) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +26 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d6 + 8 fire damage, and the target is immobilized and takes ongoing 10 fire damage (save
ends both).
MOVE ACTIONS
Fire Step (teleportation) • At Will
Effect: The efreet teleports up to 20 squares to a square adjacent to a fire or a fire creature.
Skills Bluff+22. Insight +20
Str 27 (+19) Dex 24 (+18) Wis 18 (+15)
Con 2 5 (+18) Int 16 (+14) Cha 2 2 (+17)
Alignment evil Languages Primordial
Equipment chainmail, quarterstaff
Evil Excursions and Dire Diversions: An efreet house sometimes sponsors
an excursion in which a few nobles ofthe house venture out of the Elemental
Chaos into the world or another plane. They might hunt mortals or a dangerous
creature for sport, bringing home any trophies to place in their house's mansion.
Members of these hunting parties challenge each other to see who can take the
most slaves or who can foist the best deception upon a mortal. An efreet might
take advantage of the common misconception among mortals that it can grant
wishes. Efreets in fact have no power to grant wishes, but they are not averse to
bargaining with weaker mortals. An efreet released from servitude might grant
its liberator a "wish," but sometimes the wish can have unforeseen consequences.
Efreets engage in battle or start wars of conquest for entertainment. An efreet
might have a goal in mind and be infuriated by even the smallest failures, but
ultimately its long life and its desire for pleasure give it reason to care little about
the consequences of its actions. Disappointment is temporary, and an efreet feels
assured it will get what it wants in the end.
ELEMENTAL
('luiof it creatures formed from the fundamental building blocks of creation, elementals
have brief, capricious lives. They embody the untamed nature of the Elemental Chaos and
act without logic.
A fragment of creation given Form and sapience, an elemental is a being of air,
earth, fire, or water. Like the plane that birthed them, elementals are untamed
and unpredictable; they wreak havoc wherever they go. An elemental has only a
vague physical form. It appears as a shard of raw elemental energy that threatens
to break apart at any moment.
"They might be small and fairly weak, but make no
mistake: They're the front line of an army that would tear
the world apart given half a chance."
—Shemeshka the Marauder
(l*ft to right) water elemental, earth elemental, air elemental, fire elemental
The Elemental Chaos constantly creates more elementals. When such creatures
collide, the results are predictable. Water elementals quench their fiery
kin; fire elementals fuse with creatures of air to produce columns of spinning,
roiling flame; earth elementals stand firm as their watery counterparts smash
against their stony forms. Of course, all these interactions do not preclude
elementals from unconsciously working together to tear apart a settlement or
a trespasser.
Creatures of Destruction: With nothing to govern their actions, elementals
act randomly, burning, tearing, or smashing whatever they come across.
Some sages speculate that the Elemental Chaos spits out elemental creatures to
serve as agents of entropy that revert creation back to its most basic form. The
energy and destructive power of elementals is coveted by spellcasters who hope
to harness it for their own purposes. Elementals are sometimes captured and
bound into service, allowing a spellcaster to funnel their elemental energy into
spells or devices. Attempts to control elementals often end in disaster when the
binder loses control, allowing the elementals to run amok.
Invaders from the Elemental Chaos: An elemental that is not summoned
might enter the world through a planar event in which the Elemental Chaos
intrudes on the natural world. These events are often unpredictable and can
result in catastrophic destruction. If a settlement is near the location of such
an event, an elemental incursion could cost many lives and undo years of work.
Fire elementals might burn the fields of farmers; water elementals could cause
flooding along riverbanks; earth elementals might smash through walls and
buildings; air elementals could tear off roofs or bring rockslides crashing down.
If a region isn't equipped to put down a group of rogue elementals, it might
destroy numerous villages until someone comes along to stop it.
Weapons of Primordial Power: Some scholars believe that elementals,
belying their chaotic nature, act under the guidance of higher powers. These
sages assert that the primordials, the undisputed masters of elemental power,
use elementals as tools in the world because they are unable to act from their
prisons. An elemental attack on a distant outpost might seem like an isolated
occurrence until someone realizes that each outpost along the border has suffered
a similar attack. Perhaps the realm contains an ancient secret to help
free one of the primordials, or perhaps it is a beacon of light and order in an
otherwise dark and chaotic world. Alternatively, a spellcaster might find the
summoning and binding of many powerful elementals to be a simple task,
only to later discover that the elementals allowed themselves to be bound in
order to later escape and sabotage a planar ritual, throwing open a portal to the
Elemental Chaos. Regardless of whether the speculation of scholars holds true,
elementals seem built to be weapons and tools. They lack intelligence and ambition,
making them the perfect servants of those who want to act in secrecy and
without fear of betrayal.
Lesser Air Elemental Level 1 Lurker
Small elemental magical beast (air) XP 100
HP 23; Bloodied 11
AC IS. Fortitude 12. Reflex 14. Will 13
Speed 0, fly 6 (hover)
Vulnerable S fire
Phantom on the Wind
The lesser air elemental becomes invisible whenever it starts its turn without an enemy adjacent
to it. The invisibility lasts until the end of its next turn or until it hits or misses with an
attack.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Slam • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 3 damage.
\ Grasp of Storms • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature that can't see the elemental); +4 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d6 + 4 damage, and the elemental grabs the target (escape DC 12) if it does not have a
creature grabbed. Until the grab ends, the target takes ongoing S damage, and any ranged or
melee attacks that hit the elemental deal half damage to the target.
Skills Stealth +8
Str 16 (+3) Dex 17 (+3) Wis 11 (+0)
Con 11 (+0) Int S (-3) Cha 8(-1)
Alignment unaligned Languages understands Primordial
Lesser Earth Elemental Level 2 Soldier
Small elemental magical beast (earth) X P 125 /
HP 42: Bloodied 21 Initiative +1
AC 17. Fortitude 15. Reflex 12, Will 13 Perception +1 V
Speed 5, burrow 5 Tremorsense 5
TRAITS
f W
Earth Glide
The elemental can pass through earth and rock as if it were phasing.
Brittle Skin
Whenever the elemental takes thunder damage, it takes a -2 penalty to all defenses until the
end of its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Slam • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 5 damage, and the target cannot shift until the end ofthe elemental's next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Overwhelming Stone • Recharge when first bloodied
Trigger: An enemy hits one of the elemental's allies with a melee attack.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): Melee 1 (triggering enemy). The target falls prone.
Str 17 (+4) Dex 6 (-1) Wis 11 (+1)
Con 18 (+5) Int 5 (-2) Cha 6 (-1)
Alignment unaligned Languages understands Primordial
s— t n u l ..
Lesser Fire Elemental
Small elemental magical beast (fire)
HP 27; Bloodied 13
AC 14. Fortitude 12. Reflex 14. W i l l 13
Speed 8, fly 4 (clumsy)
Level 1 Skirmisher
XP 100
Initiative +6
Perception +1
Frozen in Place
Whenever the elemental takes cold damage, it cannot shift until the end of its next turn.
Heart of Flame (fire)
Whenever an enemy adjacent to the elemental misses it with a melee attack, that enemy takes
3 fire damage.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Slam (fire) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +4 vs. Reflex
Hit: Ongoing 5 fire damage (save ends).
MINOR ACTIONS
Flickering Flame • At Will
Effect: The elemental shifts 1 square.
Str 10 (+0) Dex 19 (+4) Wis 13 (+1)
Con 11 (+0) Int S (-3) Cha 6 (-2)
Alignment unaligned Languages understands Primordial
Lesser W a t e r Elemental Level 1 Controller
Small elemental natural beast (aquatic, water) XP 100
HP 29: Bloodied 14 Initiative +2
AC 15. Fortitude 14. Reflex 13. Will 12 Perception +0
Speed 6, swim 6
Aquatic
The elemental can breathe underwater. In aquatic combat, it gains a +2 bonus to attack rolls
against nonaquatic creatures.
Sensitive to Cold
Whenever the elemental takes cold damage, it gains vulnerable 5 against the next attack that
hits it before the end of its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Slam • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +4 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d6 damage, and ongoing 5 damage (save ends).
<* Whelm • Encounter
Attack: Close blast 3 (enemies in the blast); +4 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d6 + 2 damage, and the elemental pushes the target up to 2 squares and knocks it prone.
MINOR ACTIONS
Drowning Essence • At-Will (1/round)
Effect: The elemental slides each creature taking ongoing damage from its slam 1 square.
Str 16 (+3) Dex 14 (+2) Wis 11 (+0)
Con 13 (+1) Int 5 (-3) Cha 8(-1)
Alignment unaligned Languages understands Primordial
ELF
Members of a lithe and agile race as old as the world, elves are fey humanoids who fan
be friend or foe to the other humanoid races. Three types of these creatures exist: elves,
eladrin, and drow.
Like humans, elves come in many varieties, but they share a few characteristics.
Although great gulfs exist between the three types of elves, they share their slim
builds, pointed ears, long life spans, and smooth facial features. Most elves are
skilled in many disciplines as a result of centuries of practice and training.
Elf Archer Level 2 A r t i l l e ry J
Medium fey humanoid XP 125 i
HP 32; Bloodied 16 Initiative +5 i
AC 16. Fortitude 12, Reflex 16. Will 14 Perception +9 v
Speed 7 Low-light vision I
Archer's Mobility
If the elf moves at least 4 squares from the square where it started its move, it gains a +2 bonus
to ranged attack rolls until the start of its next turn.
Wild Step
The elf ignores difficult terrain whenever it shifts.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Short Sword (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 4 damage.
® Longbow (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 30 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 4 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Elven Accuracy • Encounter
Trigger: The elf makes an attack roll.
Effect (Free Action): The elf rerolls the triggering attack roll and uses the second result.
4 Not So Close • Encounter
Trigger: An enemy makes a melee attack against the elf.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The elf can shift 1 square and then use longbow against the triggering
enemy.
Skills Nature +9, Stealth 410
Str 13 (+2) Dex 18 (+5) Wis 16 (+4)
Con 14 (+3) Int 12 (+2) Cha 11 (+1)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Elven
Equipment leather armor, short sword, longbow, 20 arrows
High Elves: Eladrin, also known as high elves, are residents ofthe Feywild
and are the longest-living of the elf subraces. They are graceful warriors and
potent wizards, commonly mixing swordplay with spells during battle. Eladrin
share many of the traits, ambitions, and vices of other civilized races, and they
tend to consider themselves above others' problems. This aloofness leads many
eladrin to regard shorter-lived humanoids as tools or fodder, easily discarded
when they outlive their usefulness.
Most eladrin live in shining cities created with the aid of arcane magic.
Eladrin build cities within nature, fusing civilization with primal beauty to
create magnificent structures that rise high
into the treetops. Many eladrin cities have
fallen into ruin, though, reclaimed by the
land as a result of the collapse of their oncegreat
empire. Some ancient eladrin
fortresses remain untouched, protected for
centuries by arcane wards. A few factions
among the eladrin want to reclaim these
abandoned lands and restore the power of
the eladrin. Other factions believe that the
time of the eladrin has passed. The two philosophies
rarely clash in the world, but in
the Feywild this conflict simmers.
Wood Elves: In the distant past, the race of elves broke away from the eladrin
and settled into the forests of the world. These elves, commonly referred to as
wood elves, live in areas of verdant forests. Since they make their homes on the
surface ofthe world and not in the Feywild or the Underdark, wood elves frequently
live among other humanoids. Unlike an eladrin, a wood elf is likely to
"Your empire no longer
claims these woods,
human, and you are no
longer welcome under
its branches."
—Janic of the
Harkenwood
become involved in the affairs of other races, usually in defense of its home or as
an ally against a great threat. A wood elf can also be an enemy to other humanoids.
though. A militant elf clan might use violence to drive back those who
encroach on its forest. Elves have a reputation as unparalleled archers. A few elf
tribes even hire out as artillery for humans and other races.
Dark Elves: An ancient rebellion against their kin drove the drow into the
depths of the Underdark where they now make their homes. Also called dark
elves, drow serve the dark goddess Lolth, who bestows venomous blessings upon
the priestesses who ride drow society.
Drow are consummate assassins and raiders. Their attacks on surface settlements
leave few alive. Deep within the Underdark, drow cities boil over with
manipulation and betrayal. The drow would be a potentially overwhelming
force to surface-dwellers if they coidd stop fighting each other long enough to
unify. Although some charismatic drow have attempted to overcome their race's
tendencies, in the end. drow alliances fall apart as they are beset by a series of
assassinations and betrayals.
Elf Scout
Medium fey humanoid
HP 39: Bloodied 19
AC 16. Fortitude 13. Reflex 15. W i l l 13
Speed 7
Level 2 Skirmisher
Initiative +7
Perception +8
Low-light vision
Combat Advantage
The elf deals 1d6 extra damage against any creature granting combat advantage to it.
Wild Step
The elf ignores difficult terrain whenever it shifts.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Longsword (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 6 damage.
0 Short Sword (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 5 damage,
t Two-Weapon Rend • Encounter
Effect: The elf uses longsword and short sword against the same target. If both attacks hit, the
target takes 4 extra damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Elven Accuracy • Encounter
Trigger: The elf makes an attack roll.
Effect (Free Action): The elf rerolls the triggering attack roll and uses the second result.
Skills Nature +8. Stealth +10
Str 12 (+2) Dex 18 (+5) Wis 14 (+3)
Con 15 (+3) Int 10 (+1) Cha 12 (+2)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Elven
Equipment hide armor, longsword, short sword
S1 1 1 - 1
« . . . . I . /
Elf Hunter
Medium fey humanoid
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion
AC 16. Fortitude 13. Reflex 15. W i l l 14
Speed 7
Level 2 Minion Skirmisher
Initiative +6
Perception +7
Low-light vision
Wild Step
The elf ignores difficult terrain whenever it shifts.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Short Sword (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 5 damage, and the elf shifts up to 2 squares.
Miss: The elf can shift 1 square.
Str 14 (+3) Dex 17 (+4) Wis 12 (+2)
Con 12 (+2) Int 14 (+3) Cha 14 (+3)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Elven
Equipment hide armor, short sword
Elf Noble Guard
Medium fey humanoid
Level 3 Soldier
XP 150 w HP 46: Bloodied 23 Initiative +6
SApCe e1d9. 7F ortitude 15. Reflex 17. Wi l l 13 LoPwer-cliegphtti ovins i+o3n i l
Wild Step
The elf ignores difficult terrain whenever it shifts.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Longsword (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 7 damage.
Effect: The elf marks the target until the end of the elfs next turn.
© Hobbling Strike (weapon) • Recharge X ii
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage, and the target is immobilized until the end of the elfs next turn.
Miss: Half damage, and the target is slowed until the end of the elfs next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Elven Accuracy • Encounter
Trigger. The elf makes an attack roll.
Effect (Free Action): The elf rerolls the triggering attack roll and uses the second result,
j Engaging Strike (weapon) • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy that is marked by the elf and is adjacent to it shifts or makes an attack that
doesn't include it as a target.
Attack (Immediate Interrupt): Melee 1 (triggering enemy); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 7 damage, and the target is immobilized until the end of its turn.
Skills Athletics +6, Acrobatics +9
Str 11 (+1) Dex 16 (+4) Wis 14 (+3)
Con 14 (+3) Int 11 (+1) Cha 10 (+1)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Elven
Equipment chainmail, longsword
Eladrin Bow Mage Level 7 Minion Artillery J
Medium fey humanoid XP 75 J HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion.
AC 21, Fortitude 18. Reflex 21. Will 19
Speed 6
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +7
Perception +10
Low-light vision
® Force Arrow (force, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 7 force damage, and the eladrin can push the target 1 square.
MOVE ACTIONS
Fey Step (teleportation) • Encounter
Effect: The eladrin teleports up to S squares.
Str 12 (+4) Dex 18 (+7) Wis 14 (+S)
Con 13 (+4) Int 14 (+S) Cha 11 (+3)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Elven
Eladrin Fey Knight
Medium fey humanoid
HP 77: Bloodied 38
AC 23. Fortitude 19. Reflex 21. W i l l 17
Speed S
Saving Throws +5 against charm effects
Level 7 Soldier (Leader)
Initiative +11
Perception +4
Low-light vision
O Feywild Tactics • Aura S
Fey allies can score critical hits on rolls of 19-20 while in the aura.
STANDARD ACTIONS
0 Longsword (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 6 damage.
0 Stab of the Wild (weapon) • Recharge X i I
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 + 8 damage, and the target is restrained until the end of the eladrin's next turn.
MINOR ACTIONS
Feywild Challenge (radiant) • At Will
Effect: Close burst 5 (one enemy in the burst). The eladrin marks the target until the end of the
encounter or until the eladrin uses this power again. While the enemy is marked by the eladrin.
it takes 4 radiant damage whenever it ends its turn without attacking the eladrin.
MOVE ACTIONS
Fey Step (teleportation) • Encounter
Effect: The eladrin teleports up to S squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Harvest's Sorrow • At Will
Trigger: An attack damages an ally.
Effect (Immediate Interrupt): Close burst 5 (triggering ally in the burst). The target takes half
damage from the triggering attack, and the eladrin takes an equal amount of damage.
Skills Athletics +12. Nature +9
Str 18 (+7) Dex 2 2 (+9) Wis 13 (+4)
Con 13 (+4) Int 14 (+5) Cha 16 (+6)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Elven
Equipment chainmail, light shield, longsword
Level 8 Controller
XP 350
Initiative +7
Perception +5
Low-light vision
Eladrin Twilight Incanter
Medium fey humanoid
HP 82: Bloodied 41
AC 22. Fortitude 18. Reflex 20. Will 22
Speed 6
Saving Throws +5 against charm effects
STANDARD ACTIONS
0 Spear (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature): +13 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage, and the target is slowed until the end ofthe eladrin's next turn.
Binding Bolt (force) • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +11 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 7 force damage, and the target is immobilized until the end of the eladrin's next turn.
Miss: The target is slowed until the end of the eladrin's next turn.
Teleporting Bolt (force, teleportation) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +11 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d10 + 5 force damage, and the eladrin teleports the target up to 3 squares.
Miss: The eladrin can teleport the target 1 square.
<• Dazzling Blast (radiant) • Recharge X][|J
Attack: Close blast 3 (enemies in the blast): +11 vs. Will
Hit: 4d6 + 2 radiant damage, and the target is blinded until the end of the eladrin's next turn.
MOVE ACTIONS
Fey Step (teleportation) • Encounter
Effect: The eladrin teleports up to 5 squares.
Str 12 (+S) Dex 16 (+7) Wis 12 (+5)
Con 10 (+4) Int 20 (+9) Cha 16 (+7)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Elven
Equipment robes, spear
Eladrin Battle Dancer Level 9 Skirmisher 4
Medium fey humanoid XP 400 I
HP 94; Bloodied 47
AC 23. Fortitude 21. Reflex 22. Will 20
Speed 6
Saving Throws +5 against charm effects
STANDARD ACTIONS
6
Initiative +11
Perception +S
Low-light vision
Dancing Blade (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 8 damage, and the eladrin becomes invisible to the target until the end of the
eladrin's next turn.
4 Battle Dance (weapon) • Encounter
Effect: The eladrin shifts up to its speed. Each time the eladrin enters a square adjacent to an
enemy for the first time during the move, it makes a melee basic attack against that enemy.
MOVE ACTIONS
Surprise Fey Step (teleportation) • Recharge :: [X] II
Effect: The eladrin teleports 5 squares. Until the end of its turn, the eladrin gains combat advantage
against each enemy adjacent to its destination square.
Str 17 (+7) Dex 20 (+9) Wis 13 (+S)
Con 14 (+6) Int 15 (+6) Cha 16 (+8)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Elven
Equipment < hainmail, longsword
Drow Stalker Level 12 Minion Lurker
Medium fey humanoid XP 175
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +15
A( 26. Fortitude 22. Reflex 25, W i l l 25 Perception +7
Speed 6 Darkvision
Stalker Ambush
When the drow hits a creature that cannot see it, the draw's attack deals 5 extra damage.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Longsword (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 10 damage.
•Y Hand Crossbow (poison, weapon) • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 5 damage, and ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends).
MINOR ACTIONS
Cloud of Darkness (zone) • Encounter
Effect: Close burst 1. The burst creates a zone that lasts until the end of the draw's next turn.
The cloud blocks line of sight for all creatures except the drow. While entirely within the cloud,
any creature other than the drow is blinded.
Str 16 (+9) Dex 20 (+11) Wis 13 (+7)
Con 14 (+8) Int 16 (+9) Cha 11 (+6)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Elven
Drow Venomblade
Medium fey humanoid
Level 13 Skirmisher
XP 800
HP 124; Bloodied 62
AC 27. Fortitude 23. Reflex 25. W i l l 22
Speed 6
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +13
Perception +13
Darkvision
m
© Longsword (poison, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage, and ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends).
© Short Sword (poison, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage, and ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends).
4 Blade Mastery • Recharge X] [II
Effect: The drow uses longsword once and short sword once.
MINOR ACTIONS
Cloud of Darkness (zone) • Encounter
Effect: Close burst 1. The burst creates a zone that lasts until the end of the draw's next turn.
The cloud blocks line of sight for all creatures except the drow. While entirely within the cloud,
any creature other than the drow is blinded.
Skills Acrobatics +16. Stealth +16
Str 16 (+9) Dex 21 (+11) Wis 14 (+8)
Con 12 (+7) Int 12 (+7) Cha 12 (+7)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Elven
Equipment longsword, short sword, hide armor
Drow Arachnomancer Level 13 A r t i l l e r y (Leader)
Medium fey humanoid XP 800
HP 94: Bloodied 47 Initiative+8
AC 27, Fortitude 23. Reflex 25, Will 25 Perception +13
Speed 6 Darkvision
TRAITS ~ .
Lolth's Judgment
Whenever the drow hits an enemy with an attack, any spiders within sight of the drow gain a +2
bonus to attack rolls against that enemy until the end of the draw's next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Scourge (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + S damage, and the target is immobilized (save ends).
Venom Ray (poison) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature): +18 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d6 + 4 poison damage, and ongoing 10 poison damage (save ends),
^r Spider Curse (necrotic) • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature): +18 vs. Will
Hit: 2d10 + 5 necrotic damage, and the target is weakened and takes ongoing 10 necrotic
damage (save ends both).
Miss: Half damage, and ongoing 5 necrotic damage (save ends).
<c* Venom Blast (poison) • Encounter
Attack: Close blast S (enemies in the blast); +16 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 3d6 + 10 poison damage.
Miss: Half damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
Cloud of Darkness (zone) • Encounter
Effect: Close burst 1. The burst creates a zone that lasts until the end of the draw's next turn.
The cloud blocks line of sight for all creatures except the draw. While entirely within the cloud,
any creature other than the drow is blinded.
Skills Arcana +14, Dungeoneering +13
Str 10 (+6) Dex 1S (+8) Wis 14 (+8)
Con 10 (+6) Int 16 (+9) Cha 11 (+6)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Elven
Equipment robes, scourge
"Lolth will savor your exquisite pain as my poison courses
through your veins."
—Matron Urlvrain of Phaervorul
ETTIN
The two headed e tfin presents a double threat for any who are unfortunate enough to
encounter one as it tramples through the hi lis in search offood and treasure. Even with
two brains, though, an ettin's intellect is limited.
Although kin to the giants, a two-headed ettin lives like an ogre and eats like a troll.
Two puny minds drive the creature's powerful body to kill anything that comes
across its path. Only spells and swords can reason with these savage humanoids.
Quarrelsome Heads: Bach ettin has two ugly heads, and the small brains in
each thick skull feud over control of its body. An ettin is constantly at war with
itself. F.ach head's personality strives to assert control. The heads often squabble
with the same selfishness and rancor as a pair of young siblings. Because an ettin
cannot survive without both heads, though, it avoids self-destructive behavior
and manages to achieve a tenuous degree of teamwork. In combat and under
stress, the two heads achieve surprising cooperation as each drives the ettin's
body to take actions twice as fast as a normal giant.
TRAITS
TRAITS
MOVE ACTIONS
+ Kick • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The ettin pushes the target up to 2 squares. The ettin then moves up to half its speed.
Str 20 (+9) Dex12(+S) Wis 15 (+6)
Con 20 (+9) Int 8 (+3) Cha 9 (+3)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Giant
E t t in W r a t h Chanter Level 8 Elite Controller (Leader)
Large natural humanoid (giant) XP 700 J
HP 184: Bloodied 92
AC 22. Fortitude 21. Reflex 17. Will 20
Speed 6
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
Initiative +5
Perception +11
Rage Song • Aura 5
Enemies take a -2 penalty to attack rolls and gain a +2 bonus to
damage rolls while in the aura. Allies gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls
and damage rolls while in the aura.
Double Actions
The ettin makes two initiative checks and takes a full turn on each initiative result. The ettin can
take two immediate actions per round but only one between one turn and the next.
Dual Brain
At the end of each of its turns, the ettin automatically ends any dazing, stunning, or charm effect
on itself.
STANDARD ACTIONS
<i Smash • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage, and the target falls prone.
Invoke Fury • At-Will
Effect: Close burst 5 (one enemy in the burst). The target must use a free action to charge or
make a basic attack against a target of the ettin's choice. The movement for this charge does
not provoke opportunity attacks.
Sir 201 ')i Dex 12 (+5) Wis 15 (+6)
Con 20 (+9) Int 8 (+3) Cha 17 (+7)
Alignment < haotic evil Languages Giant
STANDARD ACTIONS
I S Smash • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 1d12 + 3 damage.
E t t in Thug
Large natural humanoid (giant)
Level 8 Brute
XP 3S0
HP 110; Bloodied 55
AC 20. Fortitude 21. Reflex 17. Will 19
Speed 6
Double Actions
The ettin makes two initiative checks and takes a full turn on
each initiative result. The ettin can take two immediate actions
per round but only one between one turn and the next.
Initiative +5
Perception +11 i
Vicious Hunters: A small tribe of ettins can carve a path of destruction
through borderlands. A lone ettin could be less destructive but might instead
build a savage fiefdom by bullying weaker humanoids to bring it tributes of
wealth and food. An ettin will hunt, kill, and eat any creature-even other ettins,
if they are vulnerable. The creature's tremendous strength and voracious appetite
means that little remains of a victim, not even bones. Smashed caravans, collapsed
houses, and churned earth are often the only evidence of an ettin attack.
"Stay here, next to squishy wizard!"
"No, elfs arrows hurt! Smash elf!"
—Gurgnash, ettin (to himself)
An ettin is a sinister creature driven by instinct to seek dominance, inflict
pain, and cause terror. Power pleases an ettin. and it enjoys victimizing those it
sees as weak or defenseless. Warriors take advantage of this trait, using vulnerable
bait to set ambushes for ettins. Usually, livestock doesn't suffice to lure an
ettin out. The terrified screams of a potential victim are the surest way to draw
an ettin into the open.
E t t in Hunter
Large natural humanoid (giant)
HP 86: Bloodied 43
AC 24. Fortitude 23. Reflex 19. W i l l 20
Speed 6
Level 10 A r t i l l e ry
XP 500 J
Double Actions
The ettin makes two initiative checks and takes a full turn on
each initiative result. The ettin can take two immediate actions
per round but only one between one turn and the next.
n g m n m
0 Javelin (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 6 damage.
® Javelin (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 6 damage.
® Pinion (weapon) • Recharge X i i
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage, and the target is restrained until it escapes (DC 18) or teleports.
Str 20 (+10) Dex 12 (+6) Wis 15 (+7)
Con 20 (+10) Int 8 (+4) Cha 9 (+4)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Giant
Equipment 10 javelins
Primordial Demonism: Legend says that ettins arose from the blood of
Storralk, a mighty primordial of earth and stone. In ancient times, this primordial
set upon Demogorgon when the demon lord was nearly split in two by the
god Amoth. Demogorgon defeated Storralk and, as punishment, entombed
the primordial beneath his throne in the Abyss. After the battle concluded,
Demogorgon's two heads gazed into the pools of Storralk's blood, and from those
pools arose ettins. Demogorgon cast most of the giants out of the Elemental
Chaos and into the world, knowing that as manifestations of Storralk's blood, any
pain the ettins suffered would be inflicted upon the bound primordial.
Few ettins of the world know this story. An ettin that is aware of the tale,
typically one living in the Elemental Chaos, tends to regard Demogorgon as
the father of its race. An ettin respects strength, and it prefers to be associated
with Demogorgon, since he was triumphant in the battle against Storralk. Ettins
that know the story of their creation often worship other demons in addition to
Demogorgon. Such ettins believe that demons are a closer representation of their
kin than giants are. Tribes of these demon-worshiping ettins are more savage and
evil than other tribes, and many of their members are possessed by demons or
maddened by abyssal power.
E t t in Marauder Level 10 Elite Soldier -
Large natural humanoid (giant) XP I.ooo j r
HP 222; Bloodied 111 Initiative +8 j
AC 26. Fortitude 24. Reflex 20. Will 20 Perception +12/
Speed 6 (j
Saving Throws +2: Action Points 1
TRAITS '
Double Actions
The ettin makes two initiative checks and takes a full turn on
each initiative result. The ettin can take two immediate actions per '
round but only one between one turn and the next.
Dual Brain
At the end of each of its turns, the ettin automatically ends any dazing, stunning, or charm effect
on itself.
STANDARD ACTIONS
® Smash • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 1d12 + 12 damage, and the ettin can push the target 1 square.
Effect: The ettin marks the target until the end of the ettin's next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Swat • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy enters a square where it flanks the ettin.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Melee 2 (one creature flanking the ettin); +13 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The ettin pushes the target up to 3 squares.
Str 28 (+14) Dex 12 (+6) Wis 15 (+7)
Con 2 3 (+11) Int 8 (+4) Cha 9 (+4)
Alignment < haotic evil Languages Giant
I I I IN
GARGOYLE
A gargoyle is a vicious, stealthy creature that disguises itself as a statue by turning to
stone. It waits for a potential victim to pass by and then swoops down to attack.
Gargoyle Rake
Medium elemental humanoid (earth)
HP 52: Bloodied 26
AC 19. Fortitude 17. Reflex 15. W i l l 15
Level 5 Lurker
Initiative +8
Perception +9
Speed 6, fly 8 Darkvision
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 4 damage plus 2 extra damage for each one ofthe gargoyle's allies adjacent to the
target.
4 Swoop Attack • At-Will
Effect: The gargoyle flies up to its fly speed and uses claw at the end of the move. This movement
does not provoke opportunity attacks.
Stone Form • At-Will
Effect: The gargoyle enters stone form until it ends the effect as a minor action. While in this
form, it gains tremorsense 10 and resist 20 to all damage, gains 5 temporary hit points at the
start of each of its turns, and cannot take actions except to end the effect. When the gargoyle
ends the effect, it gains a +15 bonus to its next damage roll before the end of its next turn.
Skills Stealth +9
Str 19 (+6) Dex 15 (+4) Wis 15 (+4)
Con 16 (+5) Int 5 (-1) Cha 13 (+3)
Alignment evil Languages Primordial
Level 9 Lurker
Initiative +11
Perception +12
Darkvision
Gargoyle
Medium elemental humanoid (earth)
HP 77: Bloodied 38
AC 23. Fortitude 21. Reflex 19. Will 19
Speed 6. fly 8
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 5 damage.
4 Swoop Attack • At-Will
Effect: The gargoyle flies up to its fly speed and uses claw at the end of the move. This movement
does not provoke opportunity attacks.
Stone Form • At-Will
Effect: The gargoyle enters stone form until it ends the effect as a minor action. While in this
form, it gains tremorsense 10 and resist 25 to all damage, gains 5 temporary hit points at the
start of each of its turns, and cannot take actions except to end the effect. When the gargoyle
ends the effect, it gains a +20 bonus to its next damage roll before the end of its next turn.
Skills Stealth +12
Str 21 (+9) Dex 17 (+7) Wis 17 (+7)
Con 17 (+7) Int 5 (+1) Cha 17 (+7)
Alignment evil Languages Primordial
Mt>ii\lti\ A /
Gargoyle Rock Hurler
Medium elemental humanoid (earth)
HP 87: Bloodied 43
AC 25. Fortitude 21. Reflex 19. Will 19
Speed 6. fly 8
Level 11 A r t i l l e ry
XP 600
Initiative +9
Perception +13
Darkvision
Stone Defense
The gargoyle has resist 10 to all damage from attacks originating at least S squares away from it-
STANDARD ACTIONS
© C l a w • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 8 damage.
© Hurled Stone • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 9 damage.
-SI- Hail of Hurled Stone • At-Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 10 (creatures in the burst); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage, or 2d6 + 12 against a target in the burst's origin square.
Miss: Half damage.
Skills Stealth +14
Str 22 (+11)
Con 15 (+7)
Alignment evil
Equipment 10 stones
Dex 18 (+9) Wis 17 (+8)
Int 5 (+2) Cha 17 (+8)
Languages Primordial
Gargoyles take on grotesque.
statuelike forms,
lurking in these guises for
days or weeks until prey
comes near. A gargoyle
might keep itselfentertained
by attacking birds or
rodents, but what it really
wants are sentient creatures.
A gargoyle revels in ripping
apart its enemies with its
claws. Although a gargoyle
might easily slay a normal
humanoid with a single
blow, it prefers to enjoy the
kill by harrying its prey and
delivering several raking
attacks that leave a victim
alive bill incapacitated. A
gargoyle will eventually kill
and devour a victim after
I lie monster lias had its fun.
»$FIAM
A gargoyle lives in any environment where stone is common, whether it's an
area of buildings, mountains, cliffs, or underground caves. Statues of gargoyles
appear on buildings throughout the world, and many gargoyles hide among these
features. A gargoyle's reputation for cruelty has transformed its visage into a sign
of warning against intruders.
Boasts and Torture: Crude creatures that operate on base desires, gargoyles
derive amusement from taunting and threatening foes. A gargoyle singles out an
enemy that is physically weak, mocking the opponent as it swoops down to claw
at the creature. A gargoyle issues dire threats of torture and pain, attempting to
foster fear in its foe and cause the creature to bolt. Gargoyles don't require sustenance.
but most enjoy gnawing on their still-living foes. A gargoyle roost is often
adorned with the fresh corpses of victims. By the time a traveler spots such signs,
though, a gargoyle is usually swooping down to attack.
The Element of Surprise: A gargoyle's stone form doesn't necessarily
look like its natural form. The creature hides along high precipices and among
statues, maintaining a humanoid, demonic, or reptilian shape to mislead observers.
In their natural form, gargoyles have horns, wings, rocky flesh, and red eyes.
When a gargoyle charges down to deliver a surprise attack, its adopted features
melt away and are replaced by its natural appearance.
Nabassu Gargoyle Level 18 Lurker >
Medium elemental humanoid (earth) XP 2,000
HP 131; Bloodied 65 Initiative+18
AC 32. Fortitude 30. Reflex 28. W i l l 28 Perception+14 H
Speed 6. fly 8 Darkvision *
TRAITS
O Blood fire (fire, necrotic) • Aura 3
While the gargoyle is affected by stone form, whenever any enemy ends its turn in the aura, the
gargoyle gains 10 temporary hit points and the enemy takes 10 fire and necrotic damage.
1 STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At Will
Attock: Melee 1 (one creature); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage.
4 Abyssal Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 8 damage.
Stone Form (fire, necrotic) • At-Will
Effect: The gargoyle gains tremorsense 10 and resist 35 to all damage until it uses a minor action
to end this effect. When the gargoyle ends this effect, each enemy within 3 squares of it takes
2d10 + 10 fire and necrotic damage.
Skills Stealth +19
Str 25 (+16) Dex 21 (+14) Wis 21 (+14)
Con 17 (+12) Int 5 (+6) Cha 18 (+13)
Alignment evil Languages Primordial
Rocktempest Gargoyle Level 23 Elite Lurker
Large elemental humanoid (earth) XP 10,200
HP 330; Bloodied 165
AC 37. Fortitude 37, Reflex 36, Will 34
Speed 6. fly 8 (hover)
Immune petrification
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +23
Perception +14
Darkvision
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +28 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 6 damage, and ongoing 15 damage (save ends).
+ Tempest Claws • At Will
Effect: The gargoyle uses claw two times. If both attacks hit the same target, the target is also
dazed (save ends).
Stone Form • At-Will
Effect: The gargoyle enters stone form until it ends the effect as a minor action. While in this
form, it gains tremorsense 10 and resist 30 to all damage, gains 10 temporary hit points at the
start of each of its turns, and cannot take actions except to end the effect. When the gargoyle
ends the effect, it gains a +10 bonus to all damage rolls before the end of its next turn.
+ Flying Strike • Recharge when the gargoyle uses stone form
Effect: The gargoyle flies up to 8 squares. At any point during its move, it makes the following
attack three times, but only once against any creature. This movement does not provoke
opportunity attacks.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +26 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 4d8 + 12 damage, and the gargoyle slides the target up to 3 squares.
Str 26 (+19) Dex 27 (+19) Wis 17 (+14)
Con 24 (+18) Int 15 (+13) Cha 21 (+16)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Primordial
The Chaos and the Abyss: Gargoyles live throughout the planes, from
perches on ruined gates of Shadowfell cities to fortresses within the domains of
dead gods in the Astral Sea. Home for most gargoyles is the churning landscape
of the Elemental Chaos. There, gargoyles rarely pose as statues and instead
hunt on the wing, often alongside other elemental creatures. Within and near
the Abyss, deadly nabassu gargoyles join the ranks of demons to wage war or to
capture creatures that elude the abyssal hordes.
Reluctant Guardians: Gargoyles sometimes serve demons or powerful
spellcasters as guardians, keeping watch over gates and walls. A gargoyle rarely
performs this service willingly; it is usually bound by magic or cowed by threats.
A gargoyle might possess a key or a password to open a locked door or gate.
A Iraveler who answers a riddle or provides the proper identification might
IK- allowed to pass through the barrier unscathed. Gargoyles use the smallest
mistake as an excuse to attack, though. Such guardian gargoyles are usually more
intelligent than their untamed kin. but just as cruel and vicious.
I . 4 U I T l V I . 1 1 1
GHOUL
Haunting graveyards, battlefields, and crypts, ghouls hunger for the flesh of living or
recently dead creatures. They were once cannibalistic humanoids, but their actions caused
them to be cursed in death with ravenous appetites that cannot be sated.
When an intelligent humanoid resorts to cannibalism or lives a life of gluttony
and greed, it can be cursed to transform into a ghoul upon its death. Unlike a
zombie or a skeleton, a ghoul retains
"Endless hunger for the
flesh of the living, never
sated, no matter how much
it consumes—that is the
dismal unlife of a ghoul."
—Verinn, paladin of the
Raven Queen
sentience and many of the memories of
its life. The creature's perspective is
twisted by its death, though, and as a
result, it recalls with torment a time
when it was not driven by a gnawing
hunger for living flesh. A ghoul has a
humanoid appearance, but its skin
sloughs away or turns a sickly cast of
gray or green. The transformation
causes a ghoul to grow sharp fangs and
claws to tear at flesh. A ghoul dwells
anyplace where bodies are discarded
or left unattended, so a group of them might congregate in a cemetery or a battlefield.
Clerics must often be called in to repel the creatures while bodies are
gathered or sanctified for protection.
Ghoul Level S Soldier
Medium natural humanoid (undead) XP 200 i
HP 63: Bloodied 31
AC 21. Fortitude 17. Reflex 19. W i l l 16
Speed 8, climb 4
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic
Initiative +8
Perception +2
Darkvision
Weakened Paralysis
Whenever the ghoul takes radiant damage, one creature immobilized or stunned by the ghoul
can make a saving throw against one of those effects.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claws • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 6 damage, and the target is immobilized (save ends).
4 Ghoulish Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one immobilized, restrained, stunned, or unconscious creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 4d6 + 6 damage, and the target is stunned (save ends).
Skills Stealth+11
Str 14 (+4) Dex 19 (+6) Wis 11 (+2)
Con 1S (+4) Int 10 (+2) Cha 12 (+3)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common
I 21, 1 il.lH.I#t. A I !
Hunger for Flesh: A ghoul's
hunger for flesh is its primary
motivator, and it drives
the ghoul to desperation
when
food is not in
abundance.
Although ghouls
tend to lurk in
graveyards and
charnel houses,
they sometimes
attack settlements
when food
is scarce. Such
attacks leave few
survivors, for a
group of ghouls will
kill and eat anyone
in its path. A pack
of ghoids might even
resort to attacking a
well-defended settlement
or keep, especially when it
can gain entrance through
sewers, tunnels, or gaps in the
walls. Even in desperation, ghouls are cunning attackers. A horde of ghouls might
wait until nightfall before slinking through a drainage tunnel to get inside a city's
walls. Once the feeding begins, though, ghouls enter a ravenous frenzy. I hcy
pursue weak targets to sate their hunger quickly, but they gang up on tougher
defenders if necessary.
Abyssal Blessings: Most ghouls are wretched, cursed beings that dwell in the
dark places ofthe world, but some retain enough memories of life to yearn for a
purpose. Many ghouls turn to Doresain, an exarch of Orcus, to find that purpose.
The so-called Ghoul King commands his servants to empower some ghouls with
additional strength, speed, and durability. The ghouls that receive these abyssal
blessings are more powerful and are beholden to Doresain and his demonic
master. Although these abyssal ghouls still possess a ravenous hunger, they work
toward a greater end by focusing their violence against enemies of Orcus.
The White Kingdom: In the Abyss lies the White Kingdom, the scat of
I)oresain's power and a domain populated almost entirely by ghouls and other
flesh-eating undead. The buildings in the White Kingdom are made from bones
left over from devoured creatures. Doresain's palace, the largest of these buildings.
is built from the remains of a massive primordial. The Ghoul King calls
abyssal ghouls here to receive instructions. Although few living creatures see the
(iiioui r 127
White Kingdom and live to tell ahout it, rumors tell of a ritual that can temporar
ily transform a living being into a facsimile of undcath. It is said that the ritual
was crafted by one of Doresain's rivals, perhaps a demon lord, in the hope of
infiltrating the White Kingdom. Anyone hoping to obtain such a ritual would be
required to pay a terrible price, though.
Ravenous Ghoul Level 5 Brute J
Medium natural humanoid (undead) XP 200 I HP 76; Bloodied 38 Initiative +4 I f
AC 17. Fortitude 18. Reflex 17, Will 15 Perception +1 1
Speed 8, climb 4 Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic; Vulnerable 5 radiant
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claws • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 + 4 damage.
4 Ravenous Bite • Recharge X][l l]
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 + 6 damage, and ongoing S damage (save ends).
Skills Stealth +9
Str 18 (+6) Dex 14 (+4) Wis 8 (+1)
Con 16 (+5) Int 8 (+1) Cha 13 (+3)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common
Abyssal Ghoul Level 16 Skirmisher
Medium elemental humanoid (undead) XP 1,400
HP 156; Bloodied 78 Initiative+16
AC 30. Fortitude 30. Reflex 28. Will 25 Perception +10
Speed 8, climb 4 Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic
O Sepulchral Stench • Aura 3
Enemies take a -2 penalty to all defenses while in the aura.
Hindering Light
Whenever the ghoul takes radiant damage, it cannot shift until the end of its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +20 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 + 10 damage, plus 1d8 + 3 damage if the target is immobilized, restrained, stunned, or
unconscious. In addition, the target is immobilized (save ends).
Effect: The ghoul shifts up to 3 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<- Dead Blood (necrotic)
Trigger. The ghoul drops to 0 hit points.
Effect (No Action): Close burst 1 (enemies in the burst). Each target takes 10 necrotic damage.
Skills Stealth +19
Str 24 (+15) Dex 2 2 (+14) Wis 15 (+10)
Con 20 (+13) Int 16 (+11) Cha 10 (+8)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common
128 1 MontlnlA I
H
TRAITS
Sepulchral Stench • Aura 3
Enemies take a -2 penalty to all defenses while in the aura.
Unhindered
When the ghoul moves on its turn, it pulls with it any creature grabbed by it. The creature
remains grabbed, and this movement does not provoke an opportunity attack from the grabbed
creature.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Grasping Claws • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +21 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 3 damage.
Effect: The ghoul grabs the target (escape DC 22) if it has fewer than two creatures grabbed. The
ghoul then shifts up to half its speed. Until the grab ends, any melee or ranged attack that hits
the ghoul deals half damage to the ghoul and half its damage to the target.
+ Devour • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the ghoul); +21 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 5 damage, and the target is no longer grabbed by the ghoul. In addition, the target
takes ongoing 10 damage (save ends).
Miss: Half damage, and the target is no longer grabbed by the ghoul. In addition, the target takes
ongoing S damage (save ends).
Skills Stealth +18
Str 24 (+15) Dex 21 (+13) Wis 20 (+13)
Con 16 (+11) Int 11 (+8) Cha 7 (+6)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common
Abyssal Ghoul Hungerer Level 18 Minion Soldier
Medium elemental humanoid (undead) XP 1,400 .
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +18
AC 27. Fortitude 24. Reflex 23. Will 21 Perception +14 1
Speed 8, climb 4 Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic 1
STANDARD ACTIONS mm
© Claws • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 13 damage, and the target is immobilized (save ends).
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<T Dead Blood (necrotic)
Trigger: The ghoul drops to 0 hit points.
Effect (No Action): Close burst 1 (creatures in the burst). Each target takes 10 necrotic damage.
Skills Stealth +22
Str 26 (+17) Dex 25 (+16) Wis 17 (+12)
Con 23(+15) Int 19(+13) Cha13(+10)
Alignment < haotic evil Languages Abyssal
, u..iii r 124
GIANT
These massive humanoids once ruled the world beside the primordials. Now, they dominate
petty kingdoms and crush any who oppose their tyrannical reign.
Shortly after the world emerged from the smoldering forges of the primordials,
titans stepped forth to help explore and shape the new creation. They walked
atop the world's still-cooling crust and swam through its churning seas, yet
even in their immensity, the titans were too few to explore the vast world. They
created giants as a servant race, modeling them to resemble the titans' own elemental
natures. With the aid of the giants, the titans spread out across the world.
In time, the giants enslaved some of the nascent races of the gods, most notably
the dwarves. Under the giants' steady gazes and heavy hands, these industrious
slaves brought beauty and refinement to the world.
A Shattered Legacy: When the Dawn War began, titans and giants joined
the side of their creators in the battle against the gods. Although often outnumbered
by their foes, titans and giants possessed nearly unmatched strength. For
a while, the giants were victorious, and they filled their halls with the spoils of
their victories. Over time, the resolve of the giants was weakened as many ofthe
great titans and mighty citadels began to fall and the gods slew or trapped some
of the primordials. The blow that finally crippled the giants came from a source
the creatures never predicted. The dwarves, who had maintained their secret
devotion to Moradin for many years, rose up against their masters, unleashing
the fury of a hundred generations of repression.
The giants and titans still covet the power they once possessed, and they
have never forgiven the dwarves' betrayal. Although giants exist only in small,
scattered colonies across the planes, many scheme to reclaim their former
glory. They aspire to knock down the gods and bring the dwarves and other
humanoid races under their heel. Few giants still serve the primordials or work
together as once they did, yet even divided, they remain a powerful and dangerous
threat.
Born from Furor: Giants stride about the planes, crafting castles in the
highest clouds and building citadels in the darkest stretches of the Underdark.
The most common types of giants in the world are hill giants, fire giants, and
frost giants.
Dim-witted and bullying, a hill giant lives like a savage. With others of its
kind, a hill giant builds crude log forts and mud-wattle huts in the hills and
mountain valleys. Although brutish by nature, a hill giant possesses more
cunning than an ogre. A hill giant might attempt to ape the traditions of a realm
it destroys, anointing itself king and demanding a daily tribute of pumpkins and
cows. Hill giants are the weaker branch of the family of earth giants, which all
share connections to the primordial elements of earth and stone. Earth titans,
towering brutes that appear to be made of living rock and soil, are the mightiest
of these giants.
(Left to right)frost giant, fire giant, hill giant
Militaristic and domineering, a fire giant has a fiery body and a temper to
match. The fire giants' mastery of metalwork is legendary, and many weapons
of renown have been struck from their forges. A fire giant prefers to dwell in or
around volcanoes and other areas of molten rock. If such areas are unavailable,
fire giants will often build fortresses in rocky mountains. Behind the burning
iron walls of these citadels, fire giants keep slaves-particularly dwarves-to mine
ore or attend to mundane tasks.
Frost giants live in the frozen wastes, where they carve fortresses from the ice.
In these chill domains, skalds sing of the giants' victories and of the bravery of
their warriors. When food runs low or warriors grow bold, these fearsome giants
leave their realms to raid along the borders, seeking glory, carnage, and wealth.
Titanic Leaders: Titans believe themselves to be the firstborn of creation,
and they seek to emulate their primordial creators. They shape imitations of the
world from the raw pieces of the Elemental Chaos. Unlike efreets, they do not try
to impose order on the regions they control. Instead, the titans revel in the entropic
jumble of elemental forces.
A titan realm might contain places where the Elemental Chaos erupts into
the world, spilling into the heart of an active volcano, into the midst of a permanent
storm, or into the deepest reaches of a frozen wasteland. In the world, these
areas are usually populated by giants. Through these natural planar connections,
giants and titans can wreak havoc upon nearby realms, conquering vast tracts of
land until someone stops them by closing the portal or slaying their chief.
Hill Giant Level 13 Brute A Large natural humanoid (earth, giant) XP 800 //
HP 159; Bloodied 79
AC 25. Fortitude 27. Reflex 23, Will 25
Speed 8
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +5
Perception +7
© Greatdub (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 11 damage.
3r Hurl Rock (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 8 damage.
+ Sweeping Club (weapon) • Encounter
Attack: Melee 2 (one or two creatures); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 +11 damage, and the giant pushes the target up to 2 squares and knocks it prone.
Str 21 (+11) Dex 8 (+5) Wis 12 (+7)
Con 19 (+10) Int 7 (+4) Cha 9 (+S)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Giant
Equipment greatclub, 5 rocks
"Don't be fooled by its brutish appearance. A hill giant is
as close to the earth beneath your feet as a storm giant is
to the thunderhead above you."
—Noldir of Hammerfast
© Javelin (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage.
® Javelin (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +20 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 12 damage.
^T Hurl Rock (weapon) • Recharge X H
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +20 vs. AC
Hit: 4d8 + 12 damage, and the giant can push the target 1 square and knocks it prone.
Str 21 (+11) Dex 8 (+5) Wis 12 (+7)
Con 19 (+10) Int 7 (+4) Cha 9 (+5)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Giant
Equipment 6 javelins, 4 rocks
b r
Hill Giant Earth Shaman Level 13 Controller (Leader)
Large natural humanoid (earth, giant) XP 800
HP 131; Bloodied 65
AC 27. Fortitude 25. Reflex 23, Will 23
Speed 8
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +6
Perception +8
© Earthgrip Slam • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 10 damage, and the target is restrained until the end
ofthe giant's next turn.
^T Earthen Chains (healing) • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +16 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d8 + 5 damage, and the target is stunned (save ends). If the target is flying, it falls. The first
time one of the giant's allies hits the target while it is stunned by this power, that ally regains
I S hit points.
<• Earth Wave • Recharge X][l l]
Attack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +16 vs. Fortitude
Hit: I d IO + 4 damage, and the giant pushes the target up to 2 squares.
Effect: The target falls prone. Each ally in the blast can use a free action to shift up to 3 squares
and make a basic attack.
Str 21 (+11) Dex 10 (+6) Wis 14 (+8)
Con 19 (+10) Int 7 (+4) Cha 16 (+9)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Giant
Earth Titan Level 16 Elite Brute
Huge elemental humanoid (earth, giant) XP 2,800
HP 384: Bloodied 192
AC 30. Fortitude 31. Reflex 25. Will 26
Speed 6
Immune petrification
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +7
Perception +9
© Slam • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +21 vs. AC
Hit: 4d10 + 8 damage.
\ Double Attack • At Will
Effect: The titan uses slam twice.
>T Hurl Rock • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +21 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 10 damage, and the target is dazed (save ends).
Earth Shock • Encounter
Attack: Close burst 2 (enemies in the burst); +19 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 3d12 + 6 damage, and the target is stunned until the end of the titan's next turn.
Miss: Half damage.
Skills Athletics +19
Str 23 (+14) Dex 8 (+7) Wis 12 (+9)
Con 22 (+14) Int 10(+8) Cha13(+9)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Giant, Primordial
Equipment 5 rocks
TRAITS
Frost Giant Level 17 Brute
Large elemental humanoid (cold, giant) XP 1,600
HP 201; Bloodied 100 Initiative+11 J
AC 29. Fortitude 32. Reflex 27, Will 28 Perception +13 S1
Speed 8 (ice walk)
Resist 15 cold I I I
1 TRAITS 1V1
Icebound Footing
When an effect pulls, pushes, or slides the giant, it can choose
to move 2 squares less than the effect specifies. The giant can
make a saving throw to avoid falling prone when an attack would
knock it prone.
STANDARD ACTIONS
j ) Icy Greataxe (cold, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 3d12 + 11 cold damage, or 2d12 + 47 cold damage if the giant scores a critical hit.
Chilling Strike (cold, weapon) • Recharge X ii
At lock: Melee 2 (one creature); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 5d12 + 15 cold damage, and the target gains vulnerable 10 cold (save ends).
Skills Athletics +19
Str 2 3 (+14) Dex 16 (+11) Wis 20 (+13)
Con 21 (+13) Int 10(+8) Cha 12 (+9)
Alignment evil Languages Giant
Equipment hide armor, greataxe
Frost Giant Marauder Level 17 Skirmisher
Large elemental humanoid (cold, giant) XP 1,600
HP 168: Bloodied 84
AC 31. Fortitude 31. Reflex 28. Will 27
Speed 8 (ice walk)
Resist 15 cold
Initiative +14 i
Perception +11
Icebound Footing
When an effect pulls, pushes, or slides the giant, it can choose to
move 2 squares less than the effect specifies. The giant can make a
saving throw to avoid falling prone when an attack would knock it prone.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© ® Icy Handaxe (cold, weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 or Ranged 10 (one creature); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 6 cold damage.
Effect: The giant shifts up to 2 squares.
+ Twin Strike • At-Will
Effect: The giant uses icy handaxe twice and can shift up to 2 squares between the attacks.
•Y Hurling Charge • Encounter
Effect: The giant uses icy handaxe twice as ranged attacks and then charges one of the targets.
Skills Athletics +18
Str 21 (+13) Dex 19 (+12) Wis17(+11)
Con 24 (+15) Int 10 (+8) Cha 12 (+9)
Alignment evil Languages Giant
Equipment 8 handaxes
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Icy Greataxe (cold, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +2 5 vs. AC
Hit: 4d8 + 7 cold damage, and ongoing 10 cold damage (save ends). If the titan scores a critical
hit, the damage is 4d8 + 39 cold damage, and ongoing 10 cold damage (save ends).
<• Blast of Winter (cold) • Encounter
Attack: Close blast S (creatures in the blast): +23 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d12 + 12 cold damage, and ongoing 10 cold damage (save ends). In addition, the target is
immobilized until the end of the titan's next turn.
Miss: Half damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
\ Cold Blooded Kick • At Will (1/round)
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +23 vs. Reflex
Hit: 4d10 + 8 damage, and the titan pushes the target up to 2 squares and knocks it prone.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Furious Swipe • At-Will
Trigger. The titan is first bloodied or drops to 0 hit points.
Effect (Immediate Interrupt): The titan uses icygreataxe.
Skills Athletics +24
Str 28 (+19) Dex 19 (+14) Wis 23 (+16)
Con 23(+16) Int 10(+10) Cha16(+13)
Alignment evil Languages Giant, Primordial
Equipment greataxe
"They prefer to live in the world's coldest places, but
anywhere a frost giant decides to live becomes wintry
soon enough."
—Moorin of Fallcrest
r r ! .
TRAITS
Frost Titan Level 20 Elite Brute
Huge elemental humanoid (cold, giant) XP 5,600
HP 466; Bloodied 233
AC 32. Fortitude 34. Reflex 29, Will 33
Speed 8 (ice walk)
Immune cold
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
Initiative +14
Perception +16
0 Winter's Breath (cold) • Aura 2
Squares in the aura are difficult terrain for enemies. In
addition, any enemy that starts its turn in the aura takes
5 cold damage.
Icebound Footing
When an effect pulls, pushes, or slides the titan, it can choose
to move up to 4 squares less than the effect specifies. The titan can
make a saving throw to avoid falling prone when an attack would knock
it prone.
Melting Flesh
When the titan takes fire damage, it takes a -2 penalty to AC until the end of its next turn.
Fire Giant Flamecrusher Level 17 Brute '
Large elemental humanoid (fire, giant) XP 1,600 jjT/
HP 204; Bloodied 102
AC 29. Fortitude 30. Reflex 27. Will 27
Speed 8
Resist 15 fire
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +8
Perception +10
© Searing Maul (fire, weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 5d8 + 9 fire damage.
+ Overhead Smash (fire, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 4d8 + 14 fire damage, and the target fails prone.
Battering Blows (fire, weapon) • Recharge if the power misses every target
Requirement: The giant must be bloodied.
Attack: Close burst 2 (enemies in the burst); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 6d8 + 9 fire damage, and the giant pushes the target up to 2 squares.
Str 2 7 (+16) Dex 11 (+8) Wis 14 (+10)
Con 24 (+15) Int 8 (+7) Cha 11 (+8)
Alignment evil Languages Giant
Equipment maul
"They live in volcanoes and tame hell hounds, but nothing
is as hot as a fire giant's temper."
—Kristryd, paladin of Moradin
Fire Giant Level 18 Soldier
Large elemental humanoid (fire, giant) XP 2.000
HP 174; Bloodied 87
AC 34. Fortitude 34. Reflex 28. Will 28
Speed 8
Resist 15 fire
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +11
Perception +14
© Searing Greatsword (fire, weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 13 fire damage.
Effect: The giant marks the target until the end of the giant's next turn
Sweeping Sword (fire, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Close blast 2 (enemies in the blast); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 13 fire damage.
Effect: The giant marks the target until the end of the giant's next turn
Str 2 3 (+15) Dex 11 (+9) Wis 10 (+9)
Con 22 (+15) Int 10 (+9) Cha 11 (+9)
Alignment evil Languages Giant
Equipment chainmail, greatsword
SR
Fire Giant Forgecaller
Large elemental humanoid (fire, giant)
Level 18 A r t i l l e ry
XP 2,000
HP 136; Bloodied 68 Initiative +11 S i
AC 32. Fortitude 33. Reflex 29, Will 30 Perception +17//
Speed 8 1(1 Resist 15 fire I
J STANDARD ACTIONS ^
© Smoldering Mace (fire, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 11 fire damage,
^r Fire Pillar (fire) •At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +23 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d10 + 10 fire damage.
-J!- Flaming Burst (fire) • Recharge ill
Attack: Area burst 2 within 10 (creatures in the burst); +23 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d10 + 10 fire damage, and ongoing 10 fire damage (save ends).
Miss: Half damage, and ongoing S fire damage (save ends).
Str 23 (+15) Dex 15 (+11) Wis 16 (+12)
Con 2 2 (+15) Int 10 (+9) Cha 11 (+9)
Alignment evil Languages Giant
Equipment mace
HP 398: Bloodied 199
AC 37. Fortitude 34. Reflex 31. Will 31
Speed 8
Immune fire
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Fiery Greatsword (fire, weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +26 vs. AC
Hit: 6d6 + 9 fire damage, and the titan pushes the target
up to 2 squares.
Effect: The titan marks the target until the end of the titan's
next turn.
4 Double Attack • At-Will
Effect: The titan uses fiery greatsword twice.
>T Hurl Lava (fire) • Recharge X i!
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +24 vs. Reflex
Hit: 6d6 +15 fire damage, and the target is immobilized until the end of the titan's next turn. If
the target is flying, it falls.
Miss: Half damage, and the target is slowed until the end of the titan's next turn.
<- Burning Wave (fire) • At-Will
Attack: Close burst 5 (creatures in the burst); +24 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 3 fire damage, and ongoing 10 fire damage (save ends).
Sir 29 (+19) Dex 23 (+16) Wis 23 (+16)
Con 23 (+16) Int 10 (+10) Cha 21 (+15)
Alignment evil Languages Giant, Primordial
Equipment greatsword
GITHYANKI
Pirates, raiders, and soldiers of the Astra I Sea, githyanki are bloodthirsty and ruthless in
pursuit of their goals. Githyanki raiders use astral vessels to stage incursions, both on their
home plane and in the world, pillaging their targets.
The githyanki are fierce psychic warriors that ply the Astral Sea and fight with
silver swords. They were once members of a race known as the gith which spent
countless years enslaved by mind
flayers. After winning their freedom, a
faction of gith fled to the Astral Sea
and became xenophobic and militaristic.
There, the githyanki built citadels
and armies, and then set out to
conquer everything in their path.
Astral Pirates: Arguably the most
skilled navigators of the Astral Sea,
githyanki appear suddenly, seemingly
out of nowhere, to launch surprise
attacks on their victims. Githyanki use
raids to obtain wealth both to sustain
their ships and to provide their capital, Tu'narath, with supplies for the githyanki
military machine. Githyanki pirate ships act at the discretion of their captains.
"It's almost as though the
githyanki feel that the
entire universe owes them
reparations for the years of
slavery they endured under
the mind flayers."
—Philaster of Hestavar
Level 12 Soldier
XP 700
Initiative +11
Perception +12
Githyanki Warrior
Medium natural humanoid
HP 118; Bloodied 59
AC 28. Fortitude 25. Reflex 23. Will 22
SpeedS
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Silver Greatsword (psychic, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 8 psychic damage, plus 3d6 psychic damage against an immobilized target.
Effect: The githyanki marks the target until the end of the githyanki's next turn. The penalty to
attack rolls imposed by this mark is -4 instead of the normal -2.
>T Telekinetic Grasp • Recharge X] [l i
Attack: Ranged S (one Medium or smaller creature); +15 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The target is immobilized (save ends).
MOVE ACTIONS
Telekinetic Leap • Encounter
Effect: The githyanki flies up to 5 squares, or one ally within 10 squares of it can fly up to 5
squares as a free action.
Skills History +9. Insight +12
Str 21 (+11) Dex 17 (+9) Wis 12 (+7)
Con 14 (+8) Int 12 (+7) Cha 13 (+7)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Deep Speech
Equipment plate armor, silver greatsword
Githyanki Mindslicer
Medium natural humanoid
Level 13 A r t i l l e ry
XP 800 1
HP 98: Bloodied 49
AC 27. Fortitude 24. Reflex 26. Will 23
Speed 6
Initiative +9
Perception +12 i
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Silver Longsword (psychic, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 + S psychic damage.
^ Mind Slice (psychic) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +18 vs. Will
Hit: 3d8 + 8 psychic damage,
-fc Psychic Barrage (psychic) • Recharge ll]
Attack: Area burst 1 within 20 (creatures in the burst); +18 vs. Will
Hit: 2d8 + 8 psychic damage, and the target takes ongoing 10 psychic damage and can't use
daily or encounter attack powers (save ends both).
MOVE ACTIONS
Telekinetic Leap • Encounter
Effect: The githyanki flies up to S squares, or one ally within 10 squares of it can fly up to 5
squares as a free action.
Skills History +11, Insight +12
Str 14 (+8) Dex 16 (+9) Wis 12 (+7)
Con 14 (+8) Int 17 (+9) Cha 11 (+6)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Deep Speech
Equipment robes, overcoat, silver longsword
yet some githyanki raids are more than just grabs for plunder: they are part of a
larger plan hatchcd by the githyanki leadership.
Githyanki are ruthless in their raids. They restrain themselves only enough
to leave their prey with a bit to survive on. The githyanki know that a target can
be harvested more than once only if the target isn't completely crushed, and they
might return months or years later to plunder a target again.
Invaders from Another Plane: Githyanki incursions into the world are rare,
but when they do occur, they can be devastating. Most of them are major military
initiatives that feature fleets of planar ships and legions of githyanki warriors.
They take advantage of complex military strategies, including establishing
beachheads, securing defensive fortifications, dispatching advance scouts, and
planning sorties into enemy territories.
Githyanki Raider
Medium natural humanoid
Level 13 Skirmisher
XP 800
HP 126: Bloodied 63 Initiative +11
AC 27. Fortitude 23. Reflex 25. Will 27 Perception +9
Speed 6
Combat Advantage (psychic)
The githyanki deals 2d8 extra psychic damage against any creature granting combat advantage
to it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Silver Longsword (psychic, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 12 psychic damage,
j Raider's Strike (psychic, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 12 psychic damage.
Effect: The githyanki shifts up to 2 squares.
| Slash and Dash (psychic, weapon) • Encounter
Attack: Melee 1 (one or two creatures); +18 vs. AC. The githyanki can shift up to its speed before
making the second attack.
Hit: 4d8 + 14 psychic damage.
Miss: Half damage.
MOVE ACTIONS
Raider's Step • At-Will
Effect: The githyanki shifts up to 2 squares.
Telekinetic Leap • Encounter
Effect: The githyanki flies up to 5 squares, or one ally within 10 squares of it can fly up to 5
squares as a free action.
Skills History +7, Insight +14
Str 2 2 (+12) Dex 17 (+9) Wis 16 (+9)
Con 14 (+8) Int 9 (+5) Cha 8 (+5)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Deep Speech
Equipment leather armor, silver longsword
S -
14(1 \ M,iii.I.<>. it /
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +10
AC 29. Fortitude 26. Reflex 23. Will 25 Perception +9
Speed 5
I
© Silver Short Sword (psychic, weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 10 damage, plus 5 psychic damage if the target is immobilized.
•Y Telekinetic Grasp • Encounter
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +16 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The target is immobilized (save ends).
Str 16 (+9) Dex 14 (+8) Wis 16 (+9)
Con 12 (+7) Int 12 (+7) Cha 10 (+6)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common, Deep Speech
Equipment chainmail, silver short sword
Once a githyanki incursion has begun, the githyanki sometimes seek allies
among the natives of the area. It is rare for any natives to side with them, but
occasionally the githyanki do find collaborators who seek protection, advantage,
or both. Particularly cunning githyanki commanders dispatch emissaries to the
world prior to an invasion, either to sabotage their targets' defenses or to identify
potential collaborators. A greedy noble might be promised a kingdom captured
by the githyanki in exchange for information and aid, or a wizard might be
intimidated into providing assistance in return for the githyanki's promise to
leave the wizard's tower untouched during the incursion. Additionally, githyanki
often retain the service of red dragons, which serve them as mounts in battle.
Denizens of Tu'narath: Despite the fact that many of them spend their days
wandering the Astral Sea, githyanki call the fortress-city Tu'narath their home
and capital. Built atop the remains of a long-dead god, Tu'narath is the seat of
power of the githyanki lich-qucen Vlaakith.
Tu'narath serves as the focal point for githyanki navigational charts, the supply
point for their mobile shipyards, and the center of githyanki culture. The city is
also the basis for the githyanki method of navigation in the Astral Sea. Long ago.
githyanki cartographers learned to read the echoes of magical energy created by
Tu'narath, using the city as a central location around which other objects in the
sea can be found. The navigators aboard githyanki vessels possess magic maps
that remotely receive the latest navigational data from the capital's cartographers
each day.
GNOLL
Gnolls are feral, demon worshiping marauders. They attack communities along the
borderlands without warning and slaughter without mercy, all in the name of the demon
lord Yeenoghu.
Gnolls drive fear into the souls of many. These mad humanoids know nothing of
mercy and think of little but bloodletting. For most, to see a gnoll's hyenalike face
is to see one's death.
A Demon's Dogs: The Destroyer, the Beast of Butchery, and the Ruler of
Ruin-Yeenoghu has many names, but the most famous among them is Demon
Prince of Gnolls. Yeenoghu appears like a massive gnoll and has acted as a
patron to the race for as long as any can remember.
As the mortal instruments of Yeenoghu, gnolls constantly perform atrocities.
They follow the demon lord's edicts and the orders of his demons without question.
When not marauding in Yeenoghu's name, gnolls fight among themselves
and participate in ceremonies that involve acts of depravity and self-mutilation.
Some gnolls are known to mate with demons or perform rituals that bind their
bodies or souls to demonic forces.
Nomadic Destroyers: Gnolls rarely stay in one place for long. Their tribes
rove en masse, laying waste when they can. When gnolls attack and pillage a
settlement, they leave little behind but razed buildings, gnawed corpses, and
befouled land.
Gnoll Huntmaster
Medium natural humanoid
HP SO: Bloodied 25
AC 19, Fortitude 17. Reflex 18. W i l l 15
Speed 8
Level 5 A r t i l l e ry
XP 200
Initiative +4
Perception +11
Low-light vision
f
Pack Attack
The gnoll's attacks deal 5 extra damage to any enemy that has two or more ofthe gnoll's allies
adjacent to it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Handaxe (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 3 damage, or 2d6 + S while the gnoll is bloodied.
>f Longbow (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 30 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: I d IO + 8 damage, or I d IO + 10 while the gnoll is bloodied.
Skills Stealth +11
Str 16 (+5) Dex 19 (+6) Wis 14 (+4)
Con 14 (+4) Int 8 (+1) Cha 7 (+0)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal, Common
Equipment leather armor, handaxe, longbow, 30 arrows
(Left to right) deathpledged gnoll, gnoll pack lord, gnoll blood caller, gnoll huntmaster
Gnolls rarely build permanent structures and craft little of lasting value.
Indeed, they see such permanence as an affront to the Destroyer. Their only
sense of art manifests itself as grisly displays of past victories. Gnolls decorate
their armor and encampments with the bones of their victims. Impatient and
unskilled artisans, they wear patchwork armor and wield weapons taken from
the dead.
Insatiable Bloodlust: Nothing pleases a gnoll more than wanton slaughter.
Because of that fact, gnolls don't bargain or parley, and they can't be bribed.
Nothing stops gnolls from killing except for overwhelming opposition, and even
then, gnolls try to kill many foes before fleeing. Fortunately for other creatures,
the gnolls' warmongering makes them an enemy to all. Even ores avoid allying
with gnolls.
Savage Slavers: Gnolls detest physical labor and often use slaves to perform
menial chores. Slaves follow behind their raiders to haul their tents and the
few goods that the gnolls deign to carry with them. Guarded by merciless gnoll
youths, the slaves' only hope of living to the next day is to show strength and
to obey.
The life of a slave in a gnoll camp is brutal and short. That said, slaves who
show physical endurance and savagery might be indoctrinated into the gnoll vanguard.
Such creatures are usually broken in mind and spirit, having become as
cruel and ruthless as their masters.
Deathpledged Gnoll
Medium ri.itur.il hum.innid
HP 74: Bloodied 37
AC 18. Fortitude 18. Reflex 16. Will 16
Speed 8
Level 5 Brute
X P ?ON
Initiative +4
Perception +4
Low-light vision
Pack Attack
The gnoll's attacks deal S extra damage to any enemy that has two or more of the gnoll's allies
adjacent to it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Longspear (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature): +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 9 damage, or 2d6 + 11 while the gnoll is bloodied.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Claws of Yeenoghu (healing)
Trigger: The gnoll first drops to 0 hit points.
Effect (No Action): The gnoll regains S hit points, gains 1 action point, and gains resist 15 to all
damage. At the end of its next turn, the gnoll drops to 0 hit points.
Str 18 (+6) Dex 1S (+4) Wis 15 (+4)
Con 14 (+4) Int 9 (+1) Cha 7 (+0)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal. Common
Equipment leather armor, light shield, longspear
Gnoll Blood Caller
Medium natural humanoid
Level 6 Soldier
X P 250 /
HP 70: Bloodied 3S Initiative +8
AC 22. Fortitude 19. Reflex 18. Will 17 Perception +S u
Speed 8 Low light vision
TRAITS
Pack Attack
The gnoll's attacks deal S extra damage to any enemy that has two or more of the gnoll's allies
adjacent to it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claws • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage, or 2d6 + 9 while the gnoll is bloodied.
Effect: The gnoll marks the target until the end of the gnoll's next turn.
<- Blood Call (charm, psychic) • At-Will
Effect: The gnoll shifts up to 3 squares.
Attack: Close burst S (each creature marked by the gnoll in the burst); +9 vs. Will
Hit: 1d10 + 9 psychic damage, and the gnoll pulls the target up to 3 squares.
MINOR ACTIONS
<- Blood Frenzy • At Will (1/round)
Requirement: The gnoll must be bloodied.
Effect: Close burst 1 (enemies in the burst). Each target takes 5 damage and is marked by the
gnoll until the end of the gnoll's next turn.
Str 19 (+7) Dex 16 (+6) Wis1S(+S)
Con 14 (+5) Int 9 (+2) Cha 7 (+1)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal, Common
Equipment leather armor
Fang of Yeenoghu Level 7 Skirmisher (Leader)
Medium natural humanoid, gnoll XP 300
HP 77; Bloodied 38 Initiative +9
AC 21. Fortitude 18. Reflex 19. Will 18 Perception +3
Speed 8 Low-light vision K J
Pack Attack
The gnoll's attacks deal 5 extra damage to any enemy that has two or more of the gnoll's allies
adjacent to it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
6 Cudgel of Bloody Teeth (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 8 damage, or 2d6 + 10 while the gnoll is bloodied. The target takes ongoing 5
damage (save ends).
4 Relentless Push (weapon) • At Will
Effect: Before the attack, the gnoll shifts up to 2 squares.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 10 damage, or 1d10 + 12 while the gnoll is bloodied. The gnoll can push the target
1 square.
E//ect: One ally within S squares of the gnoll can shift 1 square as a free action.
<- Howl of the Demon • Recharge i i
Effect: Close burst S (allies in the burst). Each target can make a melee basic attack as a free action.
Str 16 (+6) Dex 19 (+7) Wis 11 (+3)
Con 13 (+4) Int 10 (+3) Cha 16 (+6)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal, Common
Equipment leather armor, cudgel of bloody teeth (greatclub)
Gnoll Gorger
Medium natural humanoid
Level 7 Brute
XP 300 /
HP 96; Bloodied 48 Initiative +6 I
AC 19, Fortitude 20. Reflex 18. Will 18 Perception +3
Speed 7 Low-light vision !
TRAITS
M
Pack Attack
The gnoll's attacks deal 5 extra damage to any enemy that has two or more of the gnoll's allies
adjacent to it.
STANDARD ACTIONS sr Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature): +12 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 8 damage, or 3d6 + 10 while the gnoll is bloodied.
MINOR ACTIONS
Gorge (healing) • At-Will (1/round)
Effect: Melee 1 (one ally). The target takes S damage, and the gnoll regains S hit points.
Skills Intimidate +11, Stealth +11
Str 20 (+8) Dex 17 (+6) Wis 11 (+3)
Con 16 (+6) Int 9 (+2) Cha 17 (+6)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal, Common
Equipment leather armor
Demon-Eye Gnoll
M e d i u m n a t u r a l h u m a n n ul
HP 62; Bloodied 31
AC 21. Fortitude 20. Reflex 20. Will 18
Speed 8
Level 7 Lurker
YP i nn
Initiative +11
Perception +10
Low-light vision
J1 J J)
0 Abyssal Mind (charm, psychic) • Aura 3
While the gnoll is bloodied, any enemy that ends its turn in the aura and can see the gnoll takes
S psychic damage. If the enemy is dazed, it must also make a basic attack against its nearest ally
as a free action.
Pack Attack
The gnoll's attacks deal S extra damage to any enemy that has two or more ofthe gnoll's allies
adjacent to it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
0 Glaive (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 4d4 + 5 damage, or 6d4 + 15 if the target cannot see the gnoll.
<- Stare into the Abyss • At-Will
Attack: Close burst 3 (enemies in the burst that can see the gnoll); +10 vs. Will
Hit: The target is dazed until the end of the gnoll's next turn.
Str 18 (+7) Dex 18 (+7) Wis 15 (+5)
Con 14 (+5) Int 9 (+2) Cha 7 (+1)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal, Common
Equipment leather armor, glaive
Gnoll Far Fang
Medium natural humanoid
Level 8 A r t i l l e ry
XP 350
HP 68; Bloodied 34 Initiative +9 i f i f AC 22. Fortitude 20. Reflex 22. W i l l 19 Perception +11 H f 1
Speed 8 Low-light vision
Pack Attack
The gnoll's attacks deal 5 extra damage to any enemy that has two or more of the gnoll's allies
adjacent to it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
0 Handaxe (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage, or 2d6 + 9 while the gnoll is bloodied.
>T Fang Bow (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 30 (one or two creatures); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 5 damage, or 2d10 + 7 while the gnoll is bloodied.
Hungry Arrows (weapon) • Encounter
Attack: Area burst 2 within 10 (enemies in the burst); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 5 damage, or 2d10 + 7 while the gnoll is bloodied. The target takes ongoing 5
damage (save ends).
Skills Stealth +14
Str 17 (+7)
Con 14 (+6)
Alignment chaotic evil
Dex 21 (+9) Wis 15 (+6)
Int 9 (+3) Cha 7 (+2)
Languages Abyssal, Common
Equipment leather armor, handaxe, fang bow (longbow)
Gnoll Pack Lord
Medium natural humanoid
Level 8 Controller (Leader)
XP 350
HP 90; Bloodied 45 Initiative +6
AC 2 2. Fortitude 21. Reflex 19. Wilt 2 2 Perception +6
Speed 8 Low-light vision
Pack Attack
The gnoll's attacks deal 5 extra damage to any enemy that has two or more of the gnoll's allies
adjacent to it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
® Flail (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
H K t l d l O * 11
^ Demonic Frenzy (charm) • Recharge when an ally drops to 0 hit points
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +11 vs. Will
Hit: The target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls until the end of its next turn. In addition, the
target uses a free action to make two basic attacks against a target or targets of the gnoll's
choice.
Effect: The target is dazed until the end of its next turn.
-::- Feed on the Weak • At-Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 5 (enemies in the burst); +11 vs. Will
Hit: The target grants combat advantage until the start of its next turn.
Effect: One ally in the burst can make a basic attack as a free action.
MINOR ACTIONS
<- Pack Cackle • Recharge X i i
Effect: Close burst 5 (allies in the burst). Each target can shift up to 2 squares as a free action.
Str 17 (+7) Dex 15 (+6) Wis 15 (+6)
Con 18 (+8) Int 10 (+4) Cha 20 (+9)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal, Common
Equipment leather armor, flail
Gnoll Demon Spawn
Large natural humanoid
HP 120; Bloodied 60
AC 21. Fortitude 23. Reflex 21. Will 20
Speed 8
Level 9 Brute
XP 900
Initiative +7
Perception +6
Low-light vision r
Pack Attack
The gnoll's attacks deal 5 extra damage to any enemy that has two or more of the gnoll's allies
adjacent to it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
) Claws • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10+ 5 damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
Hungry Bite • At-Will (1/round)
Requirement: The gnoll must be bloodied.
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 6 damage, and the gnoll gains 5 temporary hit points.
Str 22 (+ 10) Dex 17 (+7) Wis 15 (+6)
Con 20 (+9) Int 8 (+3) Cha 6 (+2)
Alignment • haotic evil Languages Abyssal, Common
GNOME
Many believe that the gnomes are in decline, and some even think them long extinct. As
with most things gnomish, the truth hides behind these illusions. Gnomes live in a culture
of slyness and subtlety, so it is with good reason that they are known as the hidden people.
Long ago, gnomes fell under the sway of the giants of the Feywild known as
fomorians. Sages say that this was when gnomes first mastered the magic of illusions.
With the help of the eladrin-some say with their unwitting aid-gnomes
escaped the yoke of their hideous masters and fled to the world. Now gnomes live
in great numbers on both planes, although few know this fact.
Secretive and Cautious: Gnomes live in secret places. They are unobtrusive
by nature and avoid confrontation when they can. In the forests ofthe Feywild
and the world, communities of gnomes live among the roots of trees and within
gigantic fallen trunks. Gnomes embed their structures in the forest floor, and
their camouflaged chambers often have hidden passages.
Gnome Spy Level 5 Lurker i
Small fey humanoid XP 200 /
HP SI; Bloodied 25 Initiative +10 If
AC 19. Fortitude 16. Reflex 18. Will 17 Perception +8 1
Speed 5 Low-light vision \
TRAITS
Reactive Stealth
If the gnome has cover or concealment when it rolls initiative, it can make a Stealth check to
become hidden.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Short Sword (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 4 damage, or 4d6 + 4 if the gnome was invisible to the target when it attacked.
® Dagger (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d4 + 5 damage, or 4d4 + 5 if the gnome was invisible to the target when it attacked.
Vanish from Sight (illusion) • At Will
Effect: The gnome becomes invisible until it hits or misses with an attack or until the end of its
next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Fade Away (illusion) • Encounter
Trigger: The gnome takes damage.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The gnome becomes invisible until it hits or misses with an attack or
until the end of its next turn.
Skills Bluff+10. Stealth +11
Str 10 (+2) Dex 18 (+6) Wis 13 (+3)
Con 1S (+4) Int 11 (+2) Cha 17 (+5)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Elven
Equipment leather armor, short sword, dagger
Gnome Illusionist
Small fey humanoid
Level 6 A r t i l l e ry
XP 250
HP 57; Bloodied 28
AC 20. Fortitude 15. Reflex 17, Will 18
Speed 5
Initiative +5
Perception +4
Low-light vision > 1 STANDARD ACTIONS _ -
© Gnarled Staff (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 6 damage.
-51- Bedazzle (illusion, implement, radiant) • At Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 10 (enemies in the burst); +11 vs. Will
Hit: 2d6 + 5 radiant damage, and the target grants combat advantage (save ends).
<- See Me Not (illusion, implement, psychic) • Recharge :•: i 1
Attack: Close blast 3 (enemies in the blast); +9 vs. Will
Hit: 2d6 + 10 psychic damage, and the target cannot see the gnome (save ends).
MOVE ACTIONS
There, Not There (illusion, teleportation) • Encounter
Effect: The gnome teleports up to 5 squares and creates two duplicates of itself within S squares
of its destination space. The duplicates last until the gnome attacks or until they are destroyed.
Each duplicate has 1 hit point and the same ability scores and defenses as the gnome. The
gnome can use its actions to have a duplicate act in any way it could, except that the duplicates
cannot use powers and cannot flank.
MINOR ACTIONS
Veil (illusion) • At-Will
Effect: The gnome can disguise itself and up to three allies within S squares of it to appear as any
Small or Medium creatures. A creature can see through the disguise with a successful Insight
check opposed by the gnome's Bluff check.
Skills Bluff+13. Stealth +12
Str 10 (+3) Dex 14 (+5) Wis 13 (+4)
Con I S (+5) Int 18 (+7) Cha 20 (+8)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Elven
Equipment robes, gnarled staff (quarterstaff)
When gnomes must dwell outside forests, they use the same ingenuity and
instinct to hide. A gnome in a big city might dwell in the hidden space between the
walls of two buildings and use sewers and alleys to move about. A gnome merchant
might hide his traveling goods in secret compartments built into his wagons.
Gnomes arc similarly circumspect in their interpersonal interactions. They
prefer to go unnoticed and to watch and learn, but when directly approached,
they offer friendly smiles, a rapier wit, and as little reason to take offense as
possible. Yet even after years of such amiable interactions, a gnome might still
consider another person a rival or a foe. A gnome's pleasantries might camouflage
his or her true intentions, just as foliage hides gnomish homes.
Masters of Illusion: Gnomes enjoy illusion and trickery, and they regularly
use magical means to distract and deceive. Gnomes often study arcane or
shadow magic and have many wizards and warlocks among them. Even without
formal study, a typical gnome can turn invisible, and many gnomes have other
magical abilities of deception.
"It's not so much that
we like keeping secrets
as that we hate being
discovered. We prefer
to live our lives beneath
notice, because when
we're noticed, it's
usually much bigger
and much meaner
creatures that notice us.
—Egeira of
Moonstair
STANDARD ACTIONS
MOVE ACTIONS
HP 78: Bloodied 39
AC 21. Fortitude 18. Reflex 20. Will 19
SpeedS
Initiative +9
Perception +9
Low-light vision
© Katar (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 8 damage, or 4d6 + 8 if the attack ended the gnome's shade form.
Shadow Step (teleportation) • At Will
Requirement: The gnome must be adjacent to a creature.
Effect: The gnome teleports up to 3 squares to a square adjacent to a different creature, and any
mark on the gnome ends.
MINOR ACTIONS
Shade Form • Recharge when first bloodied
Effect: The gnome assumes a shadowy form that lasts until it makes an attack roll or until the
end of its next turn. While in this form, it is insubstantial and has vulnerable 5 radiant. In addition,
it can make Stealth checks to become hidden if it has any cover or concealment.
Sustain Minor: The shadowy form persists until the end of the gnome's next turn.
Skills Stealth +12
Str 10 (+3) Dex 19 (+7) Wis 13 (+4)
Con 14 (+S) Int 14 (+S) Cha 16 (+6)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Elven
Equipment leather armor, 2 katars
Gnome Entropist Level 8 A r t i l l e ry
Small fey humanoid XP 350 (M
HP 71; Bloodied 3S Initiative >7
AC 2 2, Fortitude 19, Reflex 19. Will 21 Perception +3
Speed 5 Low-light vision
Illusory Defenses
The gnome gains a +2 bonus to all defenses against ranged attacks.
STANDARD ACTIONS
£ £
© Touch of Chaos (acid, weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 4 acid damage.
>T Entropic Arc (implement) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +13 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage, and the target cannot take immediate actions or opportunity actions until
the end of the gnome's next turn.
-51- Chaos Flare • Recharge if the power misses every target
Attack: Area burst 1 within 15 (enemies in the burst); +13 vs. Will
Hit: 3d8 + 5 damage, and the target is blinded (save ends).
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Disappearing Act (illusion) • Encounter
Trigger The gnome takes damage from an attack.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The gnome becomes invisible until the end of its next turn.
Str 10 (+4) Dex 17 (+7) Wis 8 (+3)
Con 17 (+7) Int 12 (+5) Cha 20 (+9)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common, Elven
Equipment dagger
Disguiscs-both mundane and magical-cloak gnome communities. Many
potential foes have passed through a gnome community without ever knowing it.
When enemies manage to find a gnome settlement, the gnomes use illusions to
draw them off and then move through secret passages to surround and attack them.
Gnomes also employ traps to safeguard themselves and their prized possessions.
A gnome's dwelling might contain misleading passages that lead only to
entrapment. The coin purse on a gnome's belt might hold a hand trap to catch
would-be thieves. Through the use of traps and trickery, gnomes have earned a
reputation for being more dangerous than they appear.
A Dark Side: The gnomish penchant for secrecy and deception leads some
gnomes to be exceedingly suspicious. Others are drawn to professions where they
can make careers out of duplicity. Gnomes are known to work for the eladrin as
spies or burglars. Some gnomes worship Vecna, the keeper of secrets. Others go
so far as to aid the fomorians. their former masters, acting as double agents in
eladrin courts or as informers about the alTairs of the world. Far from their traditional
forest homes, gnomes also form their own guilds of thieves.
T l L 1
GOBLIN
Goblins live for conquest and seek to rule all they can through the might of blade or spell.
Aggressive and cruel, goblins range in disposition from outright savage to rigidly
disciplined. Accompanied by their trained beasts, goblins go to war for conquest,
not mere destruction.
Three Types: Goblins come in three distinct types: goblins, bugbears, and
hobgoblins. All three have common physical characteristics: large and pointed
ears, a prominent jaw fdled with sharp
teeth, a small nose, and dark hair. Their
skin might be any shade of green, yellow, or
orange, with goblins tending toward yellowgreen,
bugbears yellow-brown, and
hobgoblins orange that can be nearly red.
Although these types are frequently thought
of as separate species that share a common
ancestor, interbreeding is possible and
results in ofTspring of either parent's type.
Goblins are the most common type of goblin and the ones that give name to
the whole race. These small, ill-tempered, and wicked creatures are well known
for their treacherous nature and infamous for their wolf-riding raiders.
"Goblins might be
pathetic if they weren't
so habitually vicious."
—Anastrianna of
Mithrendain
Goblin Sniper Level 1 Minion A r t i l l e ry 4
Small natural humanoid XP 25
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +3
AC 13. Fortitude 12. Reflex 14. Will 12 Perception +1
Speed 6 Low-light vision
Sniper
If the goblin misses with a ranged attack while hidden, it remains hidden.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Short Sword (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 4 damage.
® Shortbow (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 4 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Goblin Tactics • At Will
Trigger: The goblin is missed by a melee attack.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The goblin shifts 1 square.
Skills Stealth +8. Thievery +8
Str 13 (+1) Dex 17 (+3) Wis 12 (+1)
Con 13 (+1) Int 8 (-1) Cha8(-1)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Goblin
Equipment leather armor, short sword, shortbow, 20 arrows
Perfect Position
If the goblin is mounted and its mount ends its turn at least 4 squares from where it started, the
mounted goblin's attacks deal 1d6 extra damage until the start of the mount's next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
©Javelin (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 6 damage.
>T Javelin (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 5 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Mounted Goblin Tactics • At-Will
Requirement: The goblin must be mounted.
Trigger. The goblin or its mount is missed by a melee attack.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The goblin's mount shifts 1 square.
Skills Stealth +8. Thievery +8
Str 13 (+1) Dex 17 (+3) Wis 12 (+1)
Con 13 (+1) Int 8 (-1) Cha 8 M l
Alignment evil Languages Common, Goblin
Equipment leather armor, 6 javelins
(l ef t to right) bugbear thug, goblin cutthroat, hobgoblin spear soldier
. l o u n u rr ^u i
Bugbears weigh in as the largest and burliest of the goblins. Despite their
power, the brutes often possess astonishing skill in stealth. Whatever they can't
bully out of weaker goblins, they can often gain through theft and assassination.
The bellicose and militaristic hobgoblins are the most civilized and intelligent
ofthe goblin types, and they often rule over goblins and bugbears. After receiving
training from hobgoblins, a savage
goblin tribe known to raid caravans might
become disciplined cavalry for an invading
army of hobgoblins.
Beast Masters: Goblins possess a
mysterious knack for beast mastery. They
might not always tame the beasts they
capture, but they often achieve success
in channeling the creatures' aggression.
Goblins frequently ride wolves or giant
spiders into battle, and hobgoblins have
used manticores and wyverns as mounts. Goblins train drakes like others train
dogs, goad carrion crawlers into serving them as battle beasts, and put basilisks
in wagons to act as war machines. The truly wild monsters they capture find
their way into fighting pits where bold warriors or captives battle them to the
death in front of cheering crowds.
"That Urthok think he
so smart. Hah! Next
time he turn his back .
shhhhkkt!"
—Grukik,
goblin cutthroat
Goblin Cutthroat
Small natural humanoid
HP 30: Bloodied 15
AC 15. Fortitude 13. Reflex 14. Will 13
Speed 6
Level 1 Skirmisher
Initiative +5
Perception +2
Low-light vision
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Short Sword • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); -1-6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + S damage, or 2d6 + 5 if the goblin has combat advantage against the target. In addition,
the goblin can shift 1 square.
Dagger • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d4 + 5 damage.
MOVE ACTIONS
Deft Scurry • At Will
Effect: The goblin shifts up to 3 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Goblin Tactics • At Will
Trigger: The goblin is missed by a melee attack.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The goblin shifts 1 square.
Skills Stealth +8, Thievery +8
Str 13 (+1) Dex 17 (+3) Wis 14 (+2)
Con 14 (+2) Int 8 (-1) Cha 8(-1)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Goblin
Equipment leather armor, light shield, short sword, 2 daggers
•
•
Goblin Hex Hurler
Small natural humanoid
Level 3 Controller (Leader)
XP 150
HP 46: Bloodied 23
AC 17. Fortitude 14. Reflex 15. Will 16
Speed 6
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +3
Perception +2
Low-light vision
/ <
f&'l **
r - I
© Staff (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 7 damage, and the goblin can slide the target 1 square.
Blinding Hex • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); -1-6 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d6 + 1 damage, and the target is blinded until the end of the goblin's next turn.
>f Stinging Hex • Recharge X 1 i
Attack. Ranged 10 (one creature): +6 vs. Will
Hit: The target takes 3d6 + 1 damage if it moves during its turn (save ends).
Vexing Cloud (zone) • Encounter
Effect: Area burst 3 within 10. The burst creates a zone that lasts until the end of the goblin's
next turn. Enemies take a -2 penalty to attack rolls while in the zone.
Sustain Minor: The zone persists until the end of the goblin's next turn, and the goblin can move
it up to 5 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Goblin Tactics • At Will
Trigger: The goblin is missed by a melee attack.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The goblin shifts 1 square.
Lead from the Rear • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy hits the goblin with a ranged attack.
Effect (Immediate Interrupt): The goblin can change the attack's target to an adjacent ally of the
goblin's level or lower.
Skills Stealth +10. Thievery +10
Str 10 (+1) Dex 15 (+3) Wis 13 (+2)
Con 14 (+3) Int 9 (+0) Cha 18 (+S)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Goblin
Equipment leather robes, staff
An Ancient Empire: The goblin tradition of beast mastery might have
originated in the legendary empire the goblins once controlled. Stories of this
realm often conflict, but accounts agree on three points: Hobgoblins built it up
through conquest in the name ofthe god Bane, it stretched into the Feywild,
and it fell due to internal strife, which was stoked by the fey. To this day, goblins
loathe fey and often make special efforts to harm them, particularly elves
and eladrin.
Diverse and Widespread Tribes: Goblins share a common history, a
vicious nature, beast-taming traditions, and the worship of Bane. Beyond these
features, each tribe of goblins might difTer radically in culture. Spider-riding
goblin savages might dwell in nests within the web-strewn crowns of trees,
sharing space with allied ettercaps. Another goblin tribe might live constantly
on the move with a pack of wolves, wearing wolf pelts and howling to communicate.
A tribe of bugbears and goblins might live in the sewers of a city and act as
a thieves' guild of sorts. I lobgoblins might live in a grand city-state of their own
Hobgoblin Beast Master
Medium natural humanoid
Level 3 Controller (Leader)
XP 150
HP 47; Bloodied 23 Initiative +3
AC 17. Fortitude 17. Reflex 15. Will 15 Perception +1
Speed 6 Low-light vision
Beast Master's Exhortation
When an allied beast or magical beast that is adjacent to the hobgoblin hits with an attack, that
beast gains 5 temporary hit points.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Goad (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 6 damage.
4 War Whip (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 2d4 -l- 5 damage, and the target falls prone.
Effect: The hobgoblin can slide the target 1 square.
Attack Command • At Will
Effect: Melee 1 (one beast or magical beast ally). The target can make a basic attack as a free
action.
MOVE ACTIONS
Phalanx Movement • At Will
Effect: Close burst 1 (allies in the burst). The hobgoblin and each target can shift 1 square as a
free action. The target must shift to a square adjacent to the hobgoblin.
Str 19 (+5) Dex 14 (+3) Wis 10 (+1)
Con 15 (+3) Int 10 (+1) Cha1S(+3)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Goblin
Equipment leather armor, goad (war pick), whip
and war with nearby realms. Other hobgoblins might be ruthless headhunters
who ride behemoths through the jungle.
Many goblins still dwell in the Feywild. where their cultures take on even
stranger forms. Goblins in the Feywild dominate sentient plants and fey beasts,
and they harness the magical energy of the fey realm. Hobgoblins might cruise
through forests on floating crystals, hunting with pet will-o'-wisps.
These disparate tribes often battle one another just as readily as they do other
races, but strong leaders can bring them together. Typically a charismatic hobgoblin
warlord uses might and legends of the goblins' fallen empire to inspire
unity. Then the traditions of wildly different tribes become the deadly tactics of
military divisions.
Hobgoblin Battle Guard
Medium natural humanoid
Level 3 Soldier
XP 150
Initiative +5
Perception +8
Low-light vision
HP 49: Bloodied 24
AC 19. Fortitude 17. Reflex 15. Will 15
Speed 6
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: I d IO + 5 damage, and the hobgoblin marks the target until the start of the hobgoblin's next
turn.
MOVE ACTIONS
Phalanx Movement • At-Will
Effect: Close burst 1 (allies in the burst). The hobgoblin and each target can shift 1 square as a
free action. The target must shift to a square adjacent to the hobgoblin.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Share Shield • At Will
Trigger: An adjacent ally is hit by an attack against AC or Reflex.
Effect (Immediate Interrupt): The ally gains a +2 bonus to AC and Reflex against the triggering
attack.
Str 19 (+5) Dex 14 (+3) Wis 15 (+3)
Con 17 (+4) Int 10 (+1) Cha10(+1)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Goblin
Equipment chainmail, heavy shield, flail
Hobgoblin Spear Soldier
Medium natural humanoid
HP 48: Bloodied 24
AC 17. Fortitude 17, Reflex 15. Will 15
Speed 6
Level 3 Skirmisher
XP 150
Initiative +5
Perception +3
Low-light vision
Threatening Reach
The hobgoblin can make opportunity attacks against enemies within its weapon's reach (2
squares).
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Longspear (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: I d I O+ 6 damage,
^r javelin (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 4 damage.
MOVE ACTIONS
Phalanx Movement • At-Will
Effect: The hobgoblin and each ally adjacent to it can shift 1 square as a free action. The allies
must end adjacent to the hobgoblin.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Tactical Withdrawal • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy enters a square adjacent to the hobgoblin.
Effeit (Immediate Reaction): The hobgoblin shifts up to 3 squares.
Str 19 (+5) Dex 15 (+3) Wis 14 (+3)
Con 16 (+4) Int 11 (+1) Cha10(+1)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Goblin
Iquipment < h.ilnm.iil, longspear. 6 javelins
M M f H 7
Level 4 A r t i l l e r y (Leader)
L I
Hobgoblin Warmonger
Medium natural humanoid
HP 46; Bloodied 2 3 Initiative +6
AC 18, Fortitude 15, Reflex 17. W i l l i 6 Perception ^
Speed 6 Low-light vision
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Mace (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 6 damage.
•V Longbow (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 30 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: I d IO + 7 damage, and the target grants combat advantage until the start of the hobgoblin's
next turn.
-jo Battle Cry (charm) • Recharge when first bloodied
Target: Area burst 1 within 10 (enemies in the burst); +9 vs. Will
Hit: The target makes a basic attack as a free action against a creature of the hobgoblin's choice.
Effect: Each ally in the burst can charge or make a basic attack as a free action. If an ally hits with
the attack granted by this power, that ally gains S temporary hit points.
MOVE ACTIONS
Phalanx Movement • At Will
Effect: The hobgoblin and each ally adjacent to it can shift 1 square as a free action. The allies
must end adjacent to the hobgoblin.
Str 1S (+4) Dex 19 (+6) Wis 14 (+4)
Con 16 (+5) Int 11 (+2) Cha17(+S)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Goblin
Equipment chainmail, mace, longbow, 20 arrows
Hobgoblin Commander
Medium natural humanoid
Level S Soldier (Leader)
XP 200
HP 64: Bloodied 32
AC 21. Fortitude 21. Reflex 18. Will 19
SpeedS
Initiative +6
Perception +5
Low-light vision
Lead from the Front
When the hobgoblin hits an enemy with a melee attack, the hobgoblin's allies gain a +2 bonus
to attack rolls and damage rolls against that enemy until the end of the hobgoblin's next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Spear (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage.
Effect: The hobgoblin marks the target until the end of the hobgoblin's next turn.
MINOR ACTIONS
<• Tactical Deployment • Recharge [X i i
Effect: Close burst S (allies in the burst). Each target can shift up to 3 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Hobgoblin Resilience • Encounter
Trigger: The hobgoblin is subject to an effect that a save can end.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The hobgoblin can make a saving throw against the triggering effect.
Str 20(+7) Dex 14(+4) Wls16(+S)
Con 16 (+S) Int 12 (+3) Cha 10 (+2)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Goblin
Equipment scale armor, heavy shield, spear
Bugbear Thug
Medium natural humanoid
Level 4 Brute
XP 175 I
HP 65: Bloodied 32
Af 1£ r ... 1 , r n n , r- , •,, 11 , ,
Initiative +7
AC lb. Fortitude 11, Keflex lb, Will I I I
Speed 6
Perception +8
Low-light vision \ TRAITS
ET* 5
Bushwhack
The bugbear gains a +4 bonus to attack rolls against a creature that has no allies adjacent to it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
0 Morningstar (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 6 damage, or 3d8 + 6 if the bugbear has combat advantage against the target.
Handaxe (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 6 damage.
Skills Stealth +12
Str 20 (+7) Dex 20 (+7) Wis 13 (+3)
Con 15 (+4) Int 8 (+1) Cha10(+2)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Goblin
Equipment leather armor, morningstar, 2 handaxes
Bugbear Backstabber
Medium natural humanoid
HP 63; Bloodied 31
AC 19. Fortitude 18. Reflex 18. Will 15
Speed 6
Level 5 Skirmisher
XP 200
Initiative +9
Perception +8
Low-light vision
Bushwhack
The bugbear gains a +4 bonus to attack rolls against a creature that has no allies adjacent to it.
Expert Ambusher
If the bugbear is hidden from its target when it makes an attack, the attack deals 5 extra damage
STANDARD ACTIONS
H B T G~ reatsword (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 1 d10 + 6 damage.
>f Handaxe (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 5 damage.
MOVE ACTIONS
Stealthy Positioning • At-Will
Effect: The bugbear shifts up to its speed. If it has any cover at the end of the move, it can make
Stealth check to become hidden, with no penalty for movement.
Skills Stealth +12
Str 20 (+7) Dex 20 (+7) Wis 13 (+3)
Con 15 (+4) Int 8 (+1) Cha10<+2)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Goblin
Equipment leather armor, greatsword, 4 handaxes
GOLEM
Golems might be made from humble stuff-stone, iron, or flesh and bones-but they
possess astonishing power and durability. These automatons obey their creators above all
else. Not even the threat of destruction can affect their obedience.
Golems have no wants, need no sustenance, require no rest, feel no pain, and
know no remorse. No secrets pass their lips. No thoughts of betrayal fester in
their simple minds. They seek only to follow their creators' commands. Golems
protect or attack whomever or whatever their creators demand.
Created by Others: Only those who cannot trust living servants or who
require ageless guardians go to the great expense and effort of creating golems.
Dwarves who would see their tombs protected for eternity, a wizard who wants
to work his will upon a frightened populace, a general who desires an unstoppable
soldier, a queen who needs an enforcer and guard beyond reproach-such
are the people who craft golems.
Flesh Golem Level 12 Elite B r u t e j
Large natural animate (construct) XP 1.400 J
HP 304; Bloodied 1S2 Initiative+4 i f I
AC 24, Fortitude 26. Reflex 21, Will 21 Perception +5 / A |
Speed 6 (cannot shift) Darkvision S 1 1
Resist 10 cold t 1 Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1 ml
TRAITS
Primal Fear Nv
When the golem takes fire damage from an attack, it takes a free
action to move up to its speed, and each square it moves must place it
farther from the attacker. If it cannot move at least half its speed, it grants
combat advantage until the end of its next turn.
Life-Givingjolt
When the golem takes lightning damage, it can make a basic attack as a free action.
I STANDARD ACTIONS
© Slam • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +17 vs. AC, or +19 vs. AC while the golem is bloodied
Hit: 3d10 + 9 damage.
4 Double Attack • At Will
Effect: The golem uses slam twice. Each attack knocks the target prone if it hits,
j Golem Rampage • Recharge X ! i
Effect: The golem moves up to its speed + 2. During this movement, the golem can move through
enemies' spaces, and when the golem first enters a creature's space, it uses slam against that
creature.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Berserk Attack • At Will
Trigger: An attack damages the golem while it is bloodied.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The golem uses slam against a random target within its reach.
Str 20 (+11) Dex 7 (+4) Wis 8 (+5)
Con 2 2 (+12) Int 3 (+2) Cha 3 (+2)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
(Left to right) iron golem, flesh golem, stone golem
Painstakingly Crafted: The construction of a golem begins with the building
of its body. This work requires great command ofthe craft, whether it's stonecutting,
ironworking, or surgery. Sometimes a golem's creator is the master of the
art, but often the individual who desires a golem must hire highly skilled artisans
to do the work. If the artisans won't do the work for pay, they arc sometimes kidnapped
and forced into it.
Once a golem's body has been constructed, a ritual must be performed to give
it life. There are many versions of such rituals, but all require a sacrifice of both
wealth and blood or spirit. The vilest of
these rituals are the least expensive in gold
and the most expensive in life. All of them
result in the establishment of a connection
to the Elemental Chaos. Through a tiny rent
in the fabric of reality, the golem's creator
draws forth the same spirit stufTtapped by
the gods and the primordials when they
created the creatures of the world. This tiny spark of life has no memory, personality,
or history. It is merely the impetus to move and obey. It sees and knows its
creator, and nothing else matters.
• —r^
"Live, my darling, my
precious one. Live!"
—Drellin the Mad
Stone G o l em Level 17 Elite Soldier
Large natural animate (construct) XP 3.200 I/A
HP 336; Bloodied 168
AC 33. Fortitude 31. Reflex 26. Will 26
Speed 6 (cannot shift)
Immune disease, poison
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +8
Perception +7
Darkvision
•
© Slam • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 4d6 + 11 damage, and the golem can push the target 1 square,
i Double Attack • At-Will
Effect: The golem uses slam twice. Each attack knocks the target prone if it hits.
I Golem Rampage • Recharge X j l j
Effect: The golem moves up to its speed + 2. During this movement, the golem can move
through enemies' spaces, and when the golem first enters any creature's space, it uses slam
against that creature.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<- Death Burst
Trigger. The golem drops to 0 hit points.
Attack (No Action): Close burst 1 (creatures in the burst); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 10 damage.
Effect: The golem is destroyed. The area ofthe burst becomes difficult terrain until cleared.
Str 24 (+1S) Dex 7 (+6) Wis 8 (+7)
Con 24 (+1S) Int 3 (+4) Cha 3 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Witless Wonders: A golem cannot think or act for itself. It can understand
its creator's commands perfectly, but it has no grasp of language beyond
that understanding. Thus, a golem cannot be reasoned with or confused. In
a way, nothing exists for the golem but its creator's commands, and it takes
their intent literally. This characteristic is the golem's greatest strength and its
greatest weakness.
When its creator is on hand to command it, a golem performs flawlessly.
However, if that creator leaves the golem with instructions or is incapacitated, the
golem continues to follow its last orders to the best of its ability. A golem knows
the intent of its creator's orders, but when it cannot fulfill such orders or does
not know how to do so, it might react violently or simply stand and do nothing. A
golem that has conflicting orders might alternate between them. A golem told to
guard the door of a treasure vault against entry might break down the door itself
if it detects intruders inside. A golem commanded to kill a foe might do so and
then simply stop if it cannot hear its master's calls to return and does not have
standing orders to return once its task is complete.
Some creators grant another person or any person with a special symbol the
right to command a golem. Such practices allow for the possibility that the golem
might be used against its creator's interests, if not against the creator directly, and
those powerful enough to create a golem are usually loath to accept that risk.
b r
Iron Golem
Large natural animate (construct)
Level 20 Elite Soldier
XP 5,600
HP 386; Bloodied 193 Initiative +14
AC 36. Fortitude 36. Reflex 30. Will 28 Perception +10
Speed 6 (cannot shift) Darkvision
Immune disease, poison
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
0 Noxious Fumes (poison) • Aura 2
While the golem is bloodied, any creature that enters the aura or
starts its turn there takes 5 poison damage.
Energizing Flames
The first time the golem takes fire damage each turn, it can shift up to 2 squares
as a free action, even if it could not normally shift.
Interfering Bolts
When the golem takes lightning damage, it is slowed until the end of its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Iron Blade • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +25 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 +12 damage.
Effect: The golem marks the target (save ends).
4 Cleave • At-Will
Effect: The golem uses iron blade twice, each time against a different target.
<• Breath Weapon (poison) • Recharge XjgJI
Attack: Close blast 3 (creatures in the blast); +23 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 4d8 + 9 poison damage, and ongoing 15 poison damage (save ends).
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
\ Dazing Fist • At Will
Trigger: A creature that is within 2 squares of the golem and marked by it moves.
Attack (Immediate Interrupt): Melee 2 (triggering creature); +23 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The target is dazed (save ends).
<- Toxic Death (poison) • At-Will
Trigger: The golem is first bloodied or drops to 0 hit points.
Attack (No Action): Close burst 3 (each creature in the burst); +23 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d8 + 11 poison damage, and ongoing 10 poison damage (save ends).
Str 2 7 (+18) Dex 15 (+12) Wis 11 (+10)
Con 2 5 (+17) Int 3 (+6) Cha 3 (+6)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
"This apparatus will channel the fury of the storm above
us into the iron body of the construct, opening a tiny
portal to the Elemental Chaos and enabling the merest
spark of life to give it animation."
—Archimandrius of Vor Rukoth
f i s !
HAG
Black hearted hags embody
all that is ugly and frightful
in nature. These hideous
fey relish the opportunity
to ruin lives and disrupt
the natural order. Wicked
doesn't even begin to
describe them.
Ancicnt and cunning,
hags are wrathful,
greedy, deceptive, and
cruel. Despite these
characteristics, hags can
be bargained with, if
one has the courage to
attempt doing so. Hags'
schemes are patient,
their webs of manipulation
wide, and their lives
long: they can afford to
talk a little. Resides, the
generosity of hags has
felled far more heroes
than their claws.
Strange Sisters: Hags come in a bewildering variety, each tied to nature or
some ancient force. They share certain traits, such as having withered, hideous
female forms. Hags also share the
ability to disguise their true shapes
magically. Most can adopt the appearance
of an old woman of any
humanoid race, and some can assume
comely guises.
Tales tell of hags coming into
being through various weird means:
being birthed after a hag unites with
an cnsorcelled man; springing from
cows that give venom instead of milk; hatching from snakes' eggs kissed by
virgins; incubating in the coffins ofthe unconsecrated dead; a hag transforming
a cursed baby into another hag: and being poured whole out of cauldrons of
boiling blood.
"Teeth! Teeth! I'll tie your
teeth to my necklace with
thread from your sinews!"
—Korrigan, green hag
of the Mistmarsh
Bog Hag
Medium fey humanoid (aquatic)
HP 107; Bloodied 53
AC 24. Fortitude 23. Reflex 21. Will 19
Speed 8 (swamp walk), swim 8
Level 10 Skirmisher
Initiative >11
Perception +7
Low-light vision
0 Unwholesome Presence • Aura 3
When an enemy within the aura spends a healing surge to regain hit points, that enemy regains
only half the normal hit points.
Aquatic
The hag can breathe underwater. In aquatic combat, it gains a +2 bonus to attack rolls against
nonaquatic creatures.
Evasive Charge
The hag can take a single free action to shift up to 2 squares immediately after charging.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 9 damage.
Effect: The hag can shift up to 2 squares.
4 Rending Claws • Recharge when first bloodied
Effect: The hag uses daw twice against the same target. If both attacks hit, the target takes 5
extra damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
Skin Shift (polymorph) • At-Will
Effect: The hag alters its physical form to appear as a young female elf, half elf, eladrin, or human
until it uses change shape again or until it drops to 0 hit points. To assume a specific individual's
form, the hag must have seen that individual. Other creatures can make a DC 31 Insight check
to discern that the form is a disguise.
Skills Intimidate +12, Nature +12, Stealth +14
Str 22 (+11) Dex 18 (+9) Wis 15 (+7)
Con 19 (+9) Int 12 (+6) Cha 14 (+7)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Elven
Regardless of their origins, hags see one another as sisters. And like sisters,
they squabble. A rivalry can deteriorate into outright enmity. Such feuds between
sisters might last for decades or even centuries, as the hags manipulate events
against one another. Also like sisters, the hags might reconcile, especially if they
share some new focus for their hatred.
Bizarre and Dangerous Lairs: Hags dwell in the most desolate locales:
hoot-sucking fens, mist-shrouded moors, howling mountain passes, forbidding
tundra, damp caves, dark and thorny woods. In these lonesome places, hags
I wist Feywild magic to create eerie homes that suit their wicked sense of humor
and unsettling aesthetics. A green hag's lair might be within a tree grown into
I lie shape of an enormous headless body, and the hag might fly about in a titan's
skull, which it leaves atop its house when within. A night hag could travel with a
menagerie of monsters and slaves kept in cages, and all disguised by illusions to
II AT. Alfa1.
Green Hag Level 12 Controller
Medium fey humanoid (shapechanger)
HP 124; Bloodied 62
AC 26. Fortitude 25. Reflex 24. Will 23
Speed 8 (forest walk, swamp walk), swim 8
Resist 10 poison
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +10
Perception +14
Low-light vision
© Hurl through the Earth (teleportation) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 9 damage.
Effect: The hag teleports the target up to 3 squares.
-Jr Grasping Roots • At Will
Attack: Area burst 2 within 5 (creatures in the burst); +15 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target is restrained (save ends).
Miss: The target is slowed until the end of the hag's next turn.
Rampant Growth (zone) • Encounter
Attack: Area burst 2 within 5 centered on a creature restrained by grasping roots (creatures in
the burst); +15 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 8 damage.
Effect: The burst creates a zone that lasts until the end of the encounter. Squares in the zone
are difficult terrain for any creature that doesn't have forest walk, and such a creature takes 5
damage for each square of movement in the zone.
-{I- Stagnant Miasma (poison, zone) • Recharge (X] li
Attack: Area burst 2 within 5 (creatures in the burst); +15 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d10 + 11 poison damage.
Effect: The burst creates a zone of lightly obscured squares that lasts until the end of the hag's
next turn. Any creature that ends its turn in the zone takes 10 poison damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
Change Shape (polymorph) • At-Will
Effect: The hag alters its physical form to appear as a crone or a young woman of any Medium
humanoid race until it uses change shape again or until it drops to 0 hit points. To assume a specific
individual's form, the hag must have seen that individual. Other creatures can make a DC
33 Insight check to discern that the form is a disguise.
Skills Bluff +14, Stealth + 15
Str 21 (+11) Dex 19 (+10) Wis16(+9)
Con 20(+11) Int 15 (+8) Cha16(+9)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Elven
lure in hapless victims. Bog hags dwell in swamps and mires, from where they
emerge to ambush unwary travelers.
Foul Covens: Hags often gather in covens of like-minded members numbering
three to thirteen. A coven shares foul goals, and its members share
information and magical knowledge. Together a coven's members can perform
powerful rituals to scry upon distant places, control weather, command beasts,
cause plagues, divine the future, and lay curses.
s- i i . i . i II A i
Level 14 Lurker
XP 1.000
Night Hag
Medium fey humanoid (shapechanger)
HP 109: Bloodied 54
AC 27. Fortitude 28. Reflex 26. W i l l 26
Speed 8
O Shroud of Night • Aura 10
Within the aura, bright light is dim light, and dim light is darkness.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 6 damage. If the hag has combat advantage against the target, the target is also
stunned (save ends).
+ Dream Haunting (psychic) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one stunned or unconscious creature); +18 vs. Will
Hit: 3d6 + 4 psychic damage, and the hag disappears into the target's mind. While in this state,
the hag is removed from play and does nothing on subsequent turns but deal 3d6 + 4 psychic
damage to the target (no attack roll required). When the target is no longer stunned or unconscious,
or when the target dies, the hag reappears adjacent to the target and is insubstantial
until the start of its next turn.
<- Wave of Sleep (charm, psychic) • Recharge XHUj
Attack: Close blast 5 (creatures in the blast); +17 vs. Will
Hit: 1d8 + 3 psychic damage, and the target is dazed (save ends).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is unconscious instead of dazed (save ends).
MINOR ACTIONS
Change Shape (polymorph) • At Will
Effect: The hag alters its physical form to appear as a crone of any Medium humanoid race until it
uses change shape again or until it drops to 0 hit points. To assume a specific individual's form,
the hag must have seen that individual. Other creatures can make a DC 33 Insight check to
discern that the form is a disguise.
Skills Arcana +14, Bluff +16, Intimidate +16, Stealth +16
Str 22 (+13) Dex 18 (+11) Wis 17 (+10)
Con 19 (+11) Int 14 (+9) Cha 18 (+11)
Alignment evil Languages Common. Elven
Covens often seek to control the area around their meeting place, either
through secret manipulation or open dominance. A single hag might bully and
trick a glade of dryads or a tribe of ogres into following her commands, whereas
covens can martial far more forces, with each hag bringing new followers into
the alliance. The most powerful hag coven might command a kingdom, from
either behind the throne or on it.
HALFLING
Halflings say they travel the world,flowing with life's ups and downs and offering
friendship to all. Some non-halflings think the little folk are criminals on the run. The
truth is a complication that halflings prefer to leave in their wake.
Wherever waters run, halflings roam. These outwardly amiable wanderers
move their settlements all over the world, using waterways as their highways.
"There's no need for
a fight. Why don't
we talk about this?"
—Jarrett Farwhere
1 lu-y ac^ ,i
sense of fellowship all over
the world. This culture includes reliance on their own justice. As wanderers who
glide in and out of settled lands and alliances, halflings have developed their
own code of conduct. Like any system of justice, it can be harsh, but it protects
them and provides stability in their wandering way of life.
liilJi'^ hl.lM,f«*, A 1
Halfling Thief Level 2 Skirmisher
Small natural humanoid XP125 m
HP 34; Bloodied 17 Initiative +6
AC 16. Fortitude 13. Reflex 16. W i l l 14 Perception +1
Speed 6
Nimble Reaction
The halfling gains a +2 bonus to AC against opportunity attacks.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Dagger (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 2d4 -I- 5 damage, plus 1d6 if the halfling has combat advantage against the target.
Effect: The halfling can shift 1 square.
® Throwing Dagger (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 2d4 + S damage, plus 1d6 if the halfling has combat advantage against the target.
+ Mobile Melee Attack • At Will
Effect: The halfling moves up to 4 squares, using dagger at any point during the move. This movement
does not provoke opportunity attacks from the target ofthe attack.
Skills Acrobatics +9, Stealth +9. Thievery +9
Str 12 (+2) Dex 16 (+4) Wis 11 (+1)
Con 10 (+1) Int 10 (+1) Cha 14 (+3)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment leather armor, 6 daggers
Halfling Trickster
Small natural humanoid
HP 35; Bloodied 17
AC 17. Fortitude 15. Reflex 17. Will 17
Speed 6
Level 3 Lurker
XP150 /
Initiative +9
Perception +6
Nimble Reaction
The halfling gains a +2 bonus to AC against opportunity attacks.
Bamboozle
When the halfling ends a turn in which it did not attack and it has cover or concealment from a
creature, it is hidden from that creature until the end of its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Short Sword (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 4 damage, or 4d6 + 8 if the halfling was hidden from the target when it attacked.
MINOR ACTIONS
Smoke Pellet • At Will
Effect: Area burst 1 within 10. Squares in the burst are lightly obscured until the end ofthe halfling's
next turn.
Skills Acrobatics +12, Athletics +8, Bluff +10. Thievery +12
Str 14 (+3) Dex 19 (+S) Wis 11 (+1)
Con 11 (+1) Int 11 (+1) Cha 18 (+5)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment leather armor, short sword, 4 smoke pellets
f 169
HUMAN
The human race is the most populous in the world, and its members burn through their
short lives alight with ambition, resilience, and fierce independence.
Human Coon Level 2 Minion Soldier
Medium natural humanoid. human XP 31 f m
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +3
AC IS. Fortitude 13. Reflex 11. Will 11 Perception +2
Speed 6
Mob Rule
While at least two other human goons are within S squares of the goon, it gains a +2 power
bonus to all defenses.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Club (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 5 damage.
Str 14 (+3) Dex 11 (+1) Wis 12 (+2)
Con 12 (+2) Int 9 (+0) Cha 13 (+2)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment club
Common Bandit
Medium natural humanoid. human
HP 37: Bloodied 18
AC 16. Fortitude 12. Reflex 14. Will 12
Speed 6
Level 2 Skirmisher
XP 125
Initiative +6
Perception +1
»i
Combat Advantage
The bandit deals 1d6 extra damage against any creature granting combat advantage to it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Mace (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 5 damage, and the bandit can shift 1 square.
® Dagger (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 1d4 + 5 damage, and the bandit can shift 1 square.
| Dazing Strike (weapon) • Recharge when the attack misses
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 5 damage, and the target is dazed until the end of the bandit's next turn.
Effect: The bandit can shift 1 square.
Skills Stealth +9, Streetwise -1-7. Thievery +9
Str 12 (+2) Dex 17 (+4) Wis 11 (+1)
Con 13 (+2) Int 10 (+1) Cha 12 (+2)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment leather armor, mace, 4 daggers
When compared to other humanoid races, humans sprint through existence.
They leave blazing trails of emotion that warp and weft across the
natural world.
Great Ambition: From the first days of life, aspiration colors a human's
squalls and animates its features. Members of some races believe that humans
never really leave an infant state. However,
most acknowledge that humans pursue
their goals with unmatched zeal and
fervor. Although few humans reach great
heights, those who do so can alter
the world.
Susceptible to Temptation: The flip
side of humankind's great ambition is
its susceptibility to corruption. Unparalleled
passion regularly overshadows logic
and mercy. A human might rise up as an epic hero worthy of bardic song, but
he or she might also sink to the deepest lows, bathing in treachery and villainy
to succeed.
"You humans—in such a
rush to get to the end of
your hurried lives."
—Vyndra Sysvani
of Mithrendain
Level 3 Soldier
XP 150
Town Guard
Medium natural humanoid. human
STANDARD ACTIONS
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
HP 47; Bloodied 23
AC 19. Fortitude 16. Reflex 15, Will 14
Speed 5
Initiative +5
Perception +6
© Halberd (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 5 damage, and the town guard marks the target until the end of the town
guard's next turn.
® Crossbow (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 5 damage.
4 Powerful Strike (weapon) • Recharge X i!
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 5 damage, and the target falls prone.
4 Interceding Strike (weapon) • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy marked by the town guard makes an attack that doesn't include it as a target.
Attack (Immediate Interrupt): Melee 2 (triggering enemy); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 5 damage.
Skills Streetwise +7
Str 16 (+4) Dex 14 (+3) Wis 11 (+1)
Con 15 (+3) Int 10 (+1) Cha 12 (+2)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment chainmail, halberd, crossbow, 20 bolts
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion.
AC 21, Fortitude 20. Reflex 17. Will 18
Speed 6
Initiative +5
Perception +4
Rush into Battle
Whenever the thug hits a creature with a charge attack, the target grants combat advantage
until the end of the thug's next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Club (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 7 damage.
Str 14 (+5) Dex 11 (+3)
Con 13 (+4) Int 10 (+3)
Alignment unaligned
Equipment club
Wis 12 (+4)
Cha 13 (+4)
Languages Common
Human Transmuter
Medium natural humanoid
Level 7 Controller
XP 300 /
HP 77: Bloodied 38 Initiative +3 ! AC 21. Fortitude 18. Reflex 19. Will 20
Speed 6
STANDARD ACTIONS
Perception +11
© Staff (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 6 damage.
-JJ- Capricious Earth (charm, implement) • At-Will
Attack: Area burst 2 within S (enemies in the burst); +10 vs. Will
Hit: 2d10 + 6 damage, and the transmuter slides the target up to 3 squares.
Miss: The transmuter can slide the target 1 square.
^r Beast Curse (implement, polymorph) • Recharge : :l X i i
Attack: Ranged 5 (one hexed enemy); +10 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The transmuter alters the target's physical form to appear as a Tiny animal until the end of
the transmuter's next turn. While in this form, the target cannot use powers or make attacks.
MOVE ACTIONS
Hex Jump (teleportation) • Encounter
Effect: Close burst 5 (one hexed creature in the burst). The transmuter and the target teleport,
swapping positions.
MINOR ACTIONS
<- Hex (charm, implement) • At-Will (1/round)
Attack: Close burst S (one enemy in the burst); +10 vs. Will
Hit: The target is hexed until the end of the transmuter's next turn. While hexed, the target is
slowed and takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls and damage rolls against the transmuter.
Skills Arcana +10, Nature +11
Str 10 (+3) Dex 11 (+3) Wis 17 (+6)
Con 13 (+4) Int I S (+5) Cha14(+S)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment staff, robes
(Left to right) town guard, human duelist, human transmuter
Human Duelist Level 8 Soldier j
Medium natural humanoid XP 350
HP 85; Bloodied 42 Initiative +11
AC 24. Fortitude 20. Reflex 22. Will 20 Perception +7
Speed 6
Duelist's Poise
Whenever the duelist hits an enemy granting combat advantage to it, the enemy is immobilized
until the end of the enemy's next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Longsword (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage.
Effect: The duelist marks the target until the end of the swordsman's next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Advantageous Jab (weapon) • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy marked by the duelist makes an attack that doesn't include it as a target.
Attack (Immediate Interrupt): Melee 1 (triggering enemy); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 8 damage.
Effect: The target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls until the end of this turn.
Skills Athletics +12
Str 16(+7) Dex 20(+9) Wis17(+7)
Con 13 (+5) Int 10 (+4) Cha 9 (+3)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment leather armor, longsword
- r r f ,
HYDRA
Reptilian heads extend from a hydra's thick, serpentine body, poised to snap at any crea
ture that comes within reach.
I lydras are legendary creatures that stand alongside giants and dragons in the
world's lore. Most humanoids know hydras from chilling bedtime stories. The
same cannot be said of adventurers, sailors, and peddlers, who witness these
multiheaded predators stalking the hinterlands. These travelers know that the
myths of hydras are rooted in reality.
Born of Primordial Blood: In the age before the Dawn War, the primordial
Bryakus pulsed through the uncharted reaches of the Elemental Chaos, moving
like a kraken through the deepest seas. Bryakus was so tall that stars danced
Hydra Level 10 Solo Brute
Large natural beast (reptile, water) XP 2.500 £
HP 432; Bloodied 216 Initiative +8
AC 24. Fortitude 23. Reflex 21, Will 21 Perception +13
Speed 5, swim 10 All-around vision, darkvision
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
All Around Vision
Enemies can't gain combat advantage by flanking the hydra.
Many Headed
While stunned or dominated, the hydra can take free actions.
Regenerating Heads
The hydra starts an encounter with four heads. When the hydra's hit points first go below 324,
216, and 108, one of its heads is destroyed. Whenever a head is destroyed, the hydra grows two
heads at the start of its next turn unless it takes fire or acid damage before then.
Threatening Reach
The hydra can make opportunity attacks against enemies within 2 squares of it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 damage.
| + Hydra Fury • At-Will
Effect: The hydra uses bite a number of times equal to the number of heads it currently has. If
it has only two heads, it gains a +5 bonus to damage rolls with bite. If it has only one head, it
gains a +15 bonus to damage rolls with bite.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Snapping jaws • At-Will
Trigger. An enemy ends its turn within 2 squares of the hydra.
Effect (Free Action): The hydra uses bite twice against the triggering enemy.
Skills Stealth +13
Str 21 (+10) Dex 16 (+8) Wis 16 (+8)
Con 20 (+10) Int 2 (+1) Cha 8 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
around his crown. His enormous
hands bore hundreds of draconic
heads, and his legs were tangles of
viper coils capped with hissing,
venomous maws. Bryakus, the
Colossus of Chaos, the
Father of Fear, awed
even the gods.
When the gods
fought the primordials,
Bryakus was
among the last to fall.
According to legend,
the furious, besieged
primordial hurled
mountains across the
world's surface before
swirling into a hurricane
that whipped up noxious
clouds. When the gods
managed to entangle and
quarter Bryakus, hydras
swam from the primordials
severed limbs in a flood of
poisonous liquid. Not even the
gods know how many hydras Bryakus's
destruction birthed; nor can they be
sure of the various manifestations of elemental power found among the creatures.
As a result of Bryakus's death, hydras spread across the planes, thriving in
virtually every environment.
Predatory Water Dwellers: Although hydras cannot breathe underwater,
they are natural swimmers and prefer rivers, lakes, or oceans to land. A hydra
can hold its breath for hours, and only a single head must surface for the hydra
to breathe.
Hydras slither through swamps, lurk in lakes, and slink through rivers. Some
find their way into city sewers or use underground waterways to emerge from
village wells. Hydras also slide through Underdark tunnels, depleting the prey
from one body of water before moving on to another. Huge venom-maw hydras
swim through the depths of an ocean, rising to threaten ships.
When a hydra rests, only half its heads sleep. A hydra rarely requires shelter
Irom the elements, so it usually doesn't claim a cave or a ruin. In frosty climes,
a hydra might move into the depths of a cavern for warmth during the coldest
seasons. A hydra's preferred lair is a wallow where it can submerge its body
except for a couple of wakeful heads that keep watch above water or mud. Such
Flamekiss Hydra Level 12 Solo Brute
Large natural beast (reptile) XP 3,500 J
HP 496: Bloodied 248 Initiative +9
AC 2S. Fortitude 26. Reflex 23. Will 22 Perception +15
Speed 5 All-around vision, darkvision ;
Resist 10 fire
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
TRAITS
All Around Vision • • • H A 1
Enemies can't gain combat advantage by flanking the hydra.
Many Headed
While stunned or dominated, the hydra can take free actions.
Regenerating Heads
The hydra starts an encounter with four heads. When the hydra's hit points first go below 372,
248, and 124, one of its heads is destroyed. Whenever a head is destroyed, the hydra grows two
heads at the start of its next turn unless it takes cold or acid damage before then.
Threatening Reach
The hydra can make opportunity attacks against enemies within 2 squares of it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature): +17 vs. AC
Hit: 3d12 damage.
Flame Kiss (fire) • Recharge when the hydra loses a head
Attack: Close blast 3 (creatures in the blast): +13 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 5 fire damage, and ongoing 10 fire damage (save ends). The hydra pushes the target
up to 3 squares.
Hydra Fury • At-Will
Effect: The hydra attacks a number of times equal to the number of heads it currently has, using
either bite or fame kiss for each attack. If it has only two heads, it gains a +5 bonus to damage
rolls with the attacks. If it has only one head, it gains a +15 bonus to damage rolls with the
attack.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
j Snapping jaws • At-Will
Trigger. An enemy ends its turn within 2 squares of the hydra.
Attack (Free Action): The hydra uses bite twice against the triggering enemy.
Str 2 2 (+12) Dex 17 (+9) Wis 18 (+10)
Con 20 (+11) Int 2 (+2) Cha 8 (+5)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
behavior makes a hydra adaptable to threats while relieving it of the vulnerability
that usually comes with sleep.
Deadly Pets: A hydra is a terrifying creature and a cunning hunter, but it is
still only a beast. Unless trained to do otherwise, it kills to eat. Despite having
numerous heads, a hydra in the wild seems no more intelligent than a crocodile
or a dog. Indeed, a hydra's own heads might fight over prey or choice bits of meat.
Despite their limited intellect, hydras removed from the wild have proved
capable of learning and following commands. Each hydra presents a trainer
with at least four students. When one of a hydra's heads learns a trick, the others
b r
instantly assimilate the knowledge. A trainer that survives the initial stages
of training a hydra can usually teach the creature far more commands than a
typical beast could follow.
Giants, minotaurs, and powerful spcllcastcrs use hydras as guardians or war
beasts. Occasionally, a formidable human, goblin, halfling, or elf leader manages
to adopt a hydra. Given the creatures' proclivity for water, these pets can be
found lurking in moats, swimming alongside warships, or dwelling in constructed
pools near objects or locations in need of protecting.
Venom-Maw Hydra
Huge natural beast (reptile, water)
Level 17 Solo Brute
XP 8,000
HP 672; Bloodied 336 Initiative +13
AC 31. Fortitude 31. Reflex 29. Will 28 Perception +17
Speed 7, swim 10 All-around vision, darkvision
Resist 10 poison
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
All Around Vision
Enemies can't gain combat advantage by flanking the hydra.
Many Headed
While stunned or dominated, the hydra can take free actions.
Regenerating Heads
The hydra starts an encounter with four heads. When the hydra's hit points first go below 504,
336, and 168, one of its heads is destroyed. Whenever a head is destroyed, the hydra grows two
heads at the start of its next turn unless it takes fire or acid damage before then.
Threatening Reach
The hydra can make opportunity attacks against enemies within 3 squares of it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite (poison) • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 3d12 damage, and ongoing 10 poison damage, or ongoing 20 poison damage if the hydra is
bloodied (save ends),
^r Venomous Spit (poison) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +20 vs. Reflex. This attack does not provoke opportunity
attacks.
Hit: 2d12 + S poison damage, and the target falls prone.
Hydra Fury • At-Will
Effect: The hydra attacks a number of times equal to the number of heads it currently has, using
either bite or venomous spit for each attack. If it has only two heads, it gains a +5 bonus to
damage rolls with the attacks. If it has only one head, it gains a +15 bonus to damage rolls with
the attack.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
+ Snapping Jaws • At Will
Trigger: An enemy ends its turn within 2 squares of the hydra.
Effect (Free Action): The hydra uses bite twice against the triggering enemy.
Skills Stealth +18
Str 25 (+15) Dex 20 (+13) Wis 18 (+12)
Con 24 (+15) Int 2 (+4) Cha 8 (+7)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
KOBOLD
The small stature and cowardly behavior of these reptilian savages disguises a devious
and murderous cunning.
Kobold. Few can say the word with anything but disgust and disdain-few
except for the proud and proliferate kobolds, of course. These primitive reptilian
humanoids pose a threat to civilized people who allow the scaly monsters to
encroach on their settlements. Although kobolds are cowardly and somewhat
dim, many braver and smarter foes have fallen to their cunning after underestimating
the diminutive savages.
Trap-Filled Warrens: Kobold tribes seek out the shelter of a warren. Like
rats, they think nothing of tunneling through the ground to make a maze of crisscrossing
passages and stacked chambers. A warren's complex structure gives the
kobolds multiple routes for escape or ambush, and the passages provide ample
room for traps and murder holes in case anything tries to root out the creatures.
Nomadic kobolds litter their camps with snares, deadfalls, and trip wires. Once
an area is trapped, they dig shallow pits in which to sleep, or else drag together
hollow logs that work as makeshift warrens.
Kobold Tunneler Level 1 Minion Skirmisher
Small natural humanoid (reptile) XP 25
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +5
AC 15. Fortitude 12, Reflex 14. W i l l 12 Perception +1
Speed 6 Darkvision
STANDARD ACTIONS
©Javelin (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 4 damage.
® Javelin (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 4 damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
Shifty • At Will
Effect: The kobold shifts 1 square.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Narrow Escape • Encounter
Trigger: A close or an area attack hits or misses the kobold.
Effect (Immediate Interrupt): The kobold shifts up to 3 squares.
Str 8 (-1) Dex 16 (+3) Wis 12 (+1)
Con 12 (+1) Int 9 (-1) Cha10(+0)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
Equipment leather armor, 3 javelins
Mines, abandoned or otherwise, are favorite kobold haunts. The sites olTer
only a small number of entrances but provide vast interior spaces. If a mine isn't
depleted, kobolds might continue to dig ore in order to gain wealth or make
weapons. When a mine isn't available, a tribe of kobolds might inhabit a cave, a
ruin, or a city sewer. Any place that puts a roof over their heads and can accommodate
new passages can become a stronghold.
Creature Keepers: Kobold tribes rarely live alone in warrens. Rather, they
keep local beasts as barely tamed pets and allow larger creatures to lair in sections
of the warren that the kobolds then avoid. Insects of all sizes, odd slimes
and oozes, burrowing animals, and deadlier threats such as stirges and cave
bears, can be found dwelling side by side with kobolds.
Devious Thieves and Cunning Killers: It is a mistake to think of kobolds as
daft simpletons. In reality, their feeble appearance masks a devious and murderous
mentality.
Kobolds prefer to live in the vicinity of a dragon's lair or near communities
from which they can steal goods and consumables. Although they are vicious
foes if confronted, kobolds work to avoid notice. They can steal from fields and
storehouses for months before their presence is discovered. They rarely reveal
their true numbers, and they don't set traps outside their strongholds until after
the surrounding inhabitants realize the kobolds are in residence.
Communities that declare war on an established kobold tribe often face
destruction. When kobolds know the jig is up. they go on the offensive, booby
trapping buildings and ambushing residents in their homes. Overnight.
k'i in. ii ii 1 17Q
Kobold Slinger
Small natural humanoid (reptile)
Level 1 A r t i l l e ry
XP 100
HP 24: Bloodied 12
AC 13. Fortitude 12. Reflex 14. Will 12
Speed 6
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +3
Perception +1
Darkvision
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d4 + 3 damage.
® Sling (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 5 damage.
^ Special Shot (weapon) • At Will (3/encounter)
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + S damage plus one of the following effects (roll a d6):
3 [7* Stinkpot: The target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls (save ends).
3 0 Firepot (fire): The target takes ongoing 2 fire damage (save ends).
X 11 Gluepot: The target is immobilized (save ends).
MINOR ACTION
Shifty • At Will
Effect: The kobold shifts 1 square.
Skills Stealth +8
Str 9 (-1) Dex 17 (+3) Wis 12 (+1)
Con 12 (+1) Int 9 (-1) Cha 10 (+0)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
Equipment leather armor, dagger, sling, 20 sling bullets, 3 rounds of special shot
Kobold Quickblade Level 1 Skirmisher J
Small natural humanoid (reptile) XP100 /
HP 29: Bloodied 14 Initiative +5
AC 15. Fortitude 12. Reflex 14. Will 12 Perception +1 v
Speed 6 Darkvision
IiW'I.M:l.lJUI.l
© Short Sword (weapon) • At-Will X H B H H H I H H H B B H H I HH
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 3 damage. The attack deals 2 extra damage per square the kobold has shifted since
the start of its turn.
MOVE ACTIONS
Fleet Feet • At-Will
Effect: The kobold shifts up to 3 squares.
MINOR ACTIONS
Shifty • At Will
Effect: The kobold shifts 1 square.
Skills Athletics +4, Stealth +8. Thievery +8
Str 8 (-1) Dex 17 (+3)
Con 13 (+1) Int 9 (-1)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
Equipment leather armor, light shield, short sword
Wis 13 (+1)
Cha 10 (+0)
\I MO \ V I . M i K A J
Kobold Dragonshield Level 2 Soldier
Small natural humanoid (reptile) XP 125 I
HP 36; Bloodied 18 Initiative +4
AC 18. Fortitude 14, Reflex 13. W i l l 13 Perception +2
Speed S Darkvision i&SJR)
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Short Sword (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 6 damage.
Effect: The kobold marks the target until the end of the kobolds next turn.
4 Dirty Tactics (weapon) • Encounter
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +5 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage, and the target is immobilized until the end of the kobold's next turn.
Miss: Half damage, and the target is slowed until the end of the kobold's next turn.
MINOR ACTIONS
Shifty • At Will
Effect: The kobold shifts 1 square.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Dragonshield Tactics • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy adjacent to the kobold shifts or an enemy moves to a square adjacent to the
kobold.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The kobold shifts 1 square.
Skills Athletics +8. Stealth +7, Thievery +7
Str 14 (+3) Dex 13 (+2) Wis 12 (+2)
Con 12 (+2) Int 9 (+0) Cha 10 (+1)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
Equipment scale armor, light shield, short sword
settlements can become battlegrounds. Ifa militia tries to take the fight to the
kobold warren, the crafty fiends make themselves scarce, allowing the hapless
invaders to stumble into the tribe's deadly traps and pets.
Dragon Worshipers: Dragons rarely take notice of the tiny humanoids
crawling, wormlike, from holes in the ground, which is why kobolds can survive
in the vicinity of the creatures. A tribe goes to any length to worship at a dragon's
feet. The sight of one of the majestic creatures in flight sends a tribe into frenzied
activity. Its members don cobbled-togethcr dragon costumes and heap up
offerings in hopes of the dragon returning. When a lucky kobold tribe attracts a
dragon's attention with its odd displays, doing so can have fatal results. Numerous
deaths do nothing to dampen a tribe's enthusiasm for a dragon. Kobolds consider
il an honor to be consumed by a dragon.
Young dragons capable of tolerating fawning kobolds occasionally sponsor a
trilx-'s presence in or around their lairs. The kobolds prove useful as servants,
guardians, and early alerts to danger. Older dragons interested in employing
minions flush out kobold infestations and turn to more powerful servants. Even
in such events, a few cunning kobolds might survive to serve their angry gods in
secret. These kobolds often come to resent a dragon's new servants, though, so
I hey might seek to harm new minions or sabotage the creatures' efforts.
LICH
A dark spellcaster who covets immortality and spend his or her life in pursuit of necromantic
power might gain the ability to become a lich. A lich ties its life force to a
phylactery, ensuring that its body will coalesce in a hidden location even if some creature
were to slay it.
A lich views the world
through a prism of
endless opportunity,
where time is no longer
a relevant concern. It
severs ties to its past life,
shedding its mortal name
to adopt a false title, such
as the Forgotten King or
the Bronze Lich. Self-centered
and black-hearted,
a lich abuses and maims
with ease as it collects
knowledge and gains
influence.
The prospect of a
lich rising to power isn't
hypothetical. The god
Vecna, the githyanki
queen Vlaakith, and
the deniilich Acererak
have won great power
and infamy. A lich left
unchecked conquers
free lands, bends influential
people to its will,
and destroys anyone
and anything that
stands between it and its
ambitions.
Complex Scheming:
A lich seeks mortals to
dominate, places to control, wealth to acquire, and magic to harness. Its thirst for
power and knowledge is never quenched. As a mortal spellcaster, it worked feverishly,
racing the sands of time to attain its goals. But with eternity in its pocket,
a lich can afford to be patient. A lich's plans might ripen over generations as it
taints a royal bloodline with magic, forms and fosters an evil organization, or
reanimates legions of undead warriors. The complexity of a lich's scheme usually
S - 1 M ) \ ..
Lich Necromancer Level 14 Elite Controller
Medium natural humanoid (undead) XP 2,000
HP 268: Bloodied 134 Initiative+8
AC 28. Fortitude 24. Reflex 28. Will 27 Perception +9
Speed 6 Darkvision
Immune disease, poison: Resist 10 necrotic
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
L J
O Necromantic Aura (necrotic) • Aura S
Any living creature that ends its turn in the aura takes 5 necrotic damage. Whenever the lich
takes radiant damage, its aura is deactivated until the end of the lich's next turn.
Soul Phylactery
When the lich drops to 0 hit points, its body and possessions crumble into dust and it disappears,
but it is not destroyed. It reappears (along with its possessions) in 1d10 days within 1
square of its phylactery, unless the phylactery is destroyed.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Vampiric Touch (healing, necrotic) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d8 + 7 necrotic damage, and the lich regains hit points equal to the damage dealt.
^ Freezing Claw (cold, necrotic) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one or two creatures); +17 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 10 cold and necrotic damage, and the target is immobilized (save ends).
Miss: The target is slowed (save ends).
J- Enervating Tendrils (necrotic) • Recharge when first bloodied
Attack: Area burst 1 within 10 (enemies in the burst); +17 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 6d6 + 7 necrotic damage, and the target is weakened (save ends).
Miss: Half damage.
MOVE ACTIONS
Shadow Walk (teleportation) • Encounter
Effect: The lich teleports up to twice its speed.
MINOR ACTIONS
Lich's Control • Recharge X ii
Effect: Close burst 10 (one enemy in the burst that is subject to an effect a save can end). The
target takes a -S penalty to its next saving throw.
Skills Arcana +18. History +18. Insight +14
Str 10 (+7) Dex 12 (+8) Wis 15 (+9)
Con 14 (+9) Int 23 (+13) Cha 20 (+12)
Alignment evil Languages Abyssal, Common
stymies its pursuers. Scholars say that discovering a lich's motivation requires
delving into the creature's former life to find clues about why it first became a
dark necromancer.
Insane and Irredeemably Evil: To become a lich. a spellcaster must be
devoted to evil and adept at performing unspeakable acts of violence. Few
spellcasters have a shred of morality remaining after their transformations into
lichcs. The process of attaining lichdoni bends the mortal mind in unnatural and
crippling ways. Many lichcs rise up insane, but even they enact cunning plans;
they just do so for incomprehensible reasons.
Lich Remnant Level 16 Minion Artillery
Medium natural humanoid (undead)
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +10
AC 30. Fortitude 2 5. Reflex 29. Will 28 Perception +11
Speed 6 Darkvision
Immune disease; Resist 20 necrotic, 20 poison
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Shadow Touch (necrotic) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +19 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 8 necrotic damage.
® Shadow Ray (necrotic) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +21 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 12 necrotic damage.
| -?:- Orb of Obliteration (fire, necrotic) • At-Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 20 (enemies in the burst); +21 vs. Reflex
Hit: 10 fire and necrotic damage.
Miss: Half damage.
Obliteration Empowerment • At-Will
Effect: Ranged 5 (one lich remnant). The next time the target uses orb of obliteration before the
end of its next turn, the size of the power's burst increases by 1, and the power deals S extra
damage. Obliteration empowerment stacks with other uses of obliteration empowerment.
Str 9 (+7) Dex 14 (+10) Wis 17 (+11)
Con 20 (+13) Int 28 (+17) Cha 26 (+16)
Alignment evil Languages Abyssal. Common
Evil Sanctuaries: A spellcaster must travel far-even across the planes-to
collect the scraps of lore and esoteric components needed to enact the ritual to
transform into a lich. After the transformation, though, a lich typically returns
to its home plane and moves back into its old tower or stronghold. A lich fears
anything that might jeopardize its eternal life or acquisition of power. Thus, it
surrounds its lair with deadly traps, arcane tests and riddles, and forbidding
terrain. A lich might travel out into the world if its scheme depends on it, but it
prefers to send magical messages while staying close to its citadel.
"With an eternal semblance of life to study and practice
their magic, most liches are incredibly powerful—and
insatiably restless."
—Mari Valmidren, cleric of Ioun
Few and Faithful Allies: A lich spends its time alone in its sanctuary. It
dislikes being tied to allies, most of which have life spans too short to be of use.
Malevolent creatures idolize liches, though, serving them willingly so they can
bask in the undead creature's depths of depravity. A lich uses such hangers-on as
field agents, usually because its preferred servants-undead and construets-havc
a hard time blending in.
The Precious Phylactery: The act of becoming a lich encases a mortal's life
force in a specially prepared item called a phylactery. The most common ty|>e is a
S -
IU/1 \ « ( . . . . A t
metal box that contains strips of parchment with arcane writing. Any small item,
such as a gemstone, a ring, or a statue, can be a phylactery. Destroying a lich's
phylactery prevents the undead creature from rcmateriali/ing. which makes the
item's concealment and safekeeping a top priority for a lich.
A lich, fearing being separated from its citadel of power, might keep its phylactery
in a hidden room or nearby town. Another, focused on secrecy, might secure
its phylactery on another plane. The most cautious liches place their phylacteries
in changing or confusing locations. A phylactery might be hidden on a traveling
ship with a band of devotees, or its appearance might be duplicated in a do/en
copies that are distributed across world, ensuring that no one knows which
version is the true phylactery.
Magic wards and physical barriers are a phylactery's final defense. Even if a
mortal survives a lich's allies, that person must still overcome powerful magic to
destroy a phylactery.
Lich Soulreaver Level 22 A r t i l l e r y (Leader)
Medium natural humanoid (undead) XP 4,150
HP 156; Bloodied 78 Initiative +16
AC 36. Fortitude 32. Reflex 36. W i l l 35 Perception +14
Speed 6 Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 20 necrotic
O Necromantic Aura (necrotic) • Aura 5
Any living creature that ends its turn in the aura takes 10 necrotic damage. Whenever the lich
takes radiant damage, its aura is deactivated until the end of the lich's next turn.
Soul Phylactery
When the lich drops to 0 hit points, its body and possessions crumble into dust and it disappears,
but it is not destroyed. It reappears (along with its possessions) in 1d10 days within 1
square of its phylactery, unless the phylactery is destroyed.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Vampiric Touch (healing, necrotic) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +25 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 4d8 + 6 necrotic damage, and the lich regains hit points equal to the damage dealt.
^ Dark Bolts (lightning, necrotic) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one or two creatures); +27 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d6 + 10 lightning and necrotic damage, and an ally adjacent to the target shifts up to 2
squares.
Black Flames (fire, necrotic) • Recharge when first bloodied
Attack: Area burst 2 within 10 (enemies in the burst); +27 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d10 + 8 fire and necrotic damage, and the target takes ongoing 15 fire and necrotic
damage and grants combat advantage (save ends both).
Miss: Half damage, and ongoing 10 fire and necrotic damage (save ends).
MOVE ACTIONS
Shadow Walk (teleportation) • Encounter
Effect: The lich teleports up to twice its speed.
Skills Arcana +24, History +24, Insight +19
Str 14 (+13) Dex 20(+16) Wis17(+14)
Con 18 (+15) Int 27 (+19) Cha24(+18)
Alignment evil Languages Abyssal, Common, Elven
r . .. .. f IUL
LIZARDFOLK
These primitive hunters stalk swamps and jungles, springing with ease from murky water
and overgrown foliage. Lizardfolk tribes pair sacrificial rituals with uproariousfeasts,
cooking up beasts and trespassers alike.
"Fog rose up around us as
evening settled in, carrying
the stench of the swamp
with it. Then the weeds
and vines started coiling
around our legs."
—Anders Partieren
of Fallcrest
Lizardfolk live in forbidding grottos,
dangerous tropical isles, abandoned
jungle temples, and underground
caverns that water-filled passageways
protect. Lizardfolk can create hut
villages, but they prefer to slaughter
inhabitants of a jungle city or temple
and take over the ready-made site.
Fiercely territorial, lizardfolk use
camouflaged snares and scouts to
guard the tribe's encampment. They
rarely are caught unawares on their
home turf. When unwelcome visitors
approach the outskirts of lizardfolk
territory, a hunting band is sent to ambush or harass the trespassers. If the interlopers
appear too threatening as a group, the band tricks some into blundering
into the lairs of crocodiles or other dangerous animals.
(Left to right) greenscale bog mystic,
blackscaie crusher, greenscale raider,
poisonscale needier
Poisonscale Needier Level 3 Minion Artillery
Medium natural humanoid (reptile), lizardfolk
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +5
AC 17. Fortitude 13. Reflex 16. Will 14 Perception +3
Speed 6 (swamp walk)
cj n „ i; p_eor r
A hidden needier that misses with a ranged attack remains hidden.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 5 damage.
® Blowgun (poison, weapon) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 5 poison damage. On a critical hit, the target also falls unconscious (save ends).
Str 12 (+2) Dex 18 (+5) Wls1S(+3)
Con 11 (+1) Int 7 (-1) Cha 9 (+0)
Alignment unaligned Languages Draconic
Equipment blowgun, 10 poisoned blowgun needles
Poisonsc.ili Br.iwler Level 3 Brute
Medium natural humanoid (reptile), lizardfolk
HP SS: Bloodied 27
AC I S . Fortitude 15, Reflex 13, Will 12
Speed 6 (swamp walk)
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +3
Perception +1 S
© Club (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
H t e M t t T d — p .
| Crushing Grasp • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the brawler); +6 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 3d6 + 7 damage.
Miss: Half damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
4 Feral Grab • At-Will (1/round)
Requirement: The brawler must not be grabbing a creature.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature that isn't grabbed); +6 vs. Reflex
Hit: The brawler grabs the target (escape DC 13).
Skills Athletics +10. Stealth +8
Str 18 (+5) Dex 15 (+3) Wis 10 (+1)
Con 15 (+3) Int 7 (-1) Cha 8 (+0)
Alignment unaligned Languages Draconic
Equipment club
Intruders aren't the only creatures in danger. Since li/ardfolk are dominant
hunters, a tribe quickly clears its territory of choice small prey. Once li/ardfolk
begin searching for new meat sources, they come into conflict with civili/.ed
tribes or cities. Unlike a brutal ore attack, a lizardfolk raid is brief and mysterious.
A silent band breaks from nearby cover to swiftly capture a few succulent,
small humanoids. Then the hunters disappear back into the wilderness. Rescuing
captured victims involves tracking the lizard folk through their native terrain,
an often deadly proposition.
Masters of Traps and Tricks: Though far from being great thinkers, lizardfolk
are clever predators in their home environment. Hunters carry nets and
poison darts, and trappers set well-hidden snares and pitfalls. Weaker lizardfolk,
especially the poisonscales. harvest toxic plants with which to brew a spectrum
of poisons. Excepting some of the more brutish blackscales, all lizardfolk
become masters of camouflage. They liberally apply mud and leaves from the
swamp or jungle floor, and they move silently through thick underbrush and still
water alike.
Lizardfolk share a predatory mindset and other echoes of their reptilian heritage.
They grow docile on sunny days and bicker and spar when clouds obscure
the sky.
Greenscale Raider Level 3 Soldier
Medium natural humanoid (reptile), lizardfolk
HP 45: Bloodied 22
AC 19. Fortitude 17. Reflex 15. Will 13
Speed 6 (swamp walk)
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +5
Perception +1 w .
© Club (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10+ 5 damage.
Effect: The raider marks the target until the end of the raider's next turn.
MINOR ACTIONS
©Tail Sweep • At Will
Requirement: The raider must be bloodied.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target falls prone.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
+ Hunter's Response • Recharge :: X If
Trigger: An enemy adjacent to the raider shifts.
Attack (Immediate Interrupt): Melee 1 (triggering enemy); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10+ 3 damage.
Miss: Half damage.
Skills Athletics +10. Stealth +8
Str 18 (+5) Dex 15 (+3) Wis10(+1)
Con 13 (+2) Int 8 (+0) Cha8(+0)
Alignment unaligned Languages Draconic
Equipment turtle shell shield, club
N - 1 U U 1
Greenscale Trapper Level 3 Controller
Medium natural humanoid (reptile), lizardfolk XP 150
HP 46; Bloodied 23
AC 17. Fortitude 14. Reflex 16. Will 14
Speed 6 (swamp walk)
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +5
Perception +3
© Spear (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 6 damage.
<- Net Toss (weapon) • At-Will
Requirement: The trapper must be wielding a net.
Attack: Close blast 2 (enemies in the blast); +6 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d4 + 3 damage, and the target is immobilized (save ends).
Miss: The trapper can slide the target 1 square to a square not in the blast.
MOVE ACTIONS
Net Drag • At-Will
Effect: The trapper moves up to its speed, pulling creatures immobilized by its net an equal
number of squares. This movement does not provoke opportunity attacks from creatures
immobilized by the trapper's net.
MINOR ACTIONS
4 Feral Kick • At-Will
Requirement: The trapper must be bloodied.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. Reflex
Hit: The trapper can slide the target 1 square.
Skills Athletics +7, Stealth +10
Str 13 (+2) Dex 18 (+5) Wis 14(+3)
Con 14 (+3) Int 8 (+0) Cha 8 (+0)
Alignment unaligned Languages Draconic
Equipment 3 nets, spear
Greenscale Raider Level 4 Skirmisher
Medium natural humanoid (reptile), lizardfolk
HP 54; Bloodied 27
AC 18. Fortitude 17. Reflex 16. Will 15
Speed 6 (swamp walk)
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +6
Perception +8
© Spear (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 6 damage.
4 Sidestep Attack (weapon) • At-Will
Effect: The hunter can shift 1 square and then use spear.
MINOR ACTIONS
4 Feral Tail Lash • At Will
Requirement: The hunter must be bloodied.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 damage, and the hunter can shift 1 square.
Skills Athletics +10. Stealth +9
Str 17 (+5) Dex 15 (+4) Wis 12 (+3)
Con 14 (+4) Int 8 (+1) Cha 8 (+1)
Alignment unaligned Languages Draconic
( qulpmenl light shield, spc.ii
I I / A U 111 I I
Greenscale Bog Mystic Level 6 Controller (Leader)
Medium natural humanoid (reptile), lizardfolk
HP 70: Bloodied 35
AC 20. Fortitude 17, Reflex 16. Will 19
Speed 6 (swamp walk)
Initiative +4
Perception +7 \
0 Swamp Tangle • Aura 5
Whenever an enemy in the aura is hit by an attack, squares in the aura are difficult terrain for
that enemy until the end of its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Spear (weapon) • At Will
Attack.-Melee 1 (one creature);+11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 5 damage.
-J5- Bog Cloud (poison) • Recharge Xj [i i
Attack: Area burst 2 within 5 (creatures in the burst); +9 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d6 + 7 poison damage, and the target is dazed until the end of the mystic's next turn.
Miss: The target grants combat advantage until the end of the mystic's next turn,
•ft Swamp's Grasp (zone) • Encounter
Attack: Area burst 2 within 5 (enemies in the burst); -1-9 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d6 + 4 damage, and the target is immobilized (save ends).
Miss: Half damage, and the target is slowed (save ends).
Effect: The burst creates a zone of difficult terrain until the end of the encounter. The zone does
not affect creatures that have swamp walk.
MINOR ACTIONS
4 Feral Tail Lash • At Will
Requirement: The mystic must be bloodied.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d6 damage, and the target is slowed until the end of the mystic's next turn.
Skills Athletics +10. Nature +12, Stealth +9
Str 15 (+5) Dex 13 (+4) Wis 19 (+7)
Con 14 (+5) Int 10 (+3) Cha 12 (+4)
Alignment evil Languages Draconic
Equipment spear
Many Breeds, Each Deadly: The lizardfolk lineage splits into several breeds,
each of which has a specific purpose within the tribe. Greenscales, the most
common variety, hunt medium-sized game and build traps. Most mystics come
from the ranks of the greenscales, as do lizardfolk adept at training wild beasts.
The hulking blackscales provide the intimidation factor, lending brute strength
to their more clever and deft kin. A tribe has only a few blackscales. Even though
they aren't suited to leadership roles, their physical might is a boon to their kinsfolk.
Poisonscales are the smallest of the lizardfolk. They are the tribe's stealthiest
members and masters of crafting poison. When raiding, they hide in trees or
shallow pools, attacking soundlessly. Poisonscales frequently serve as teachers for
young greenscales, which are the same size as full-grown poisonscales.
i «m A I 'M
STANDARD ACTIONS
MINOR ACTIONS
© Feral Bite • At-Will
Requirement: The bruiser must be bloodied.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 4 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Tail Swipe • Recharge when first bloodied
Intimidation and Fanaticism: Might makes right in the patriarchal structure
of a lizardfolk tribe. The strongest of mind and body becomes the lizard
king. Mystics also wield great power among these easily awed creatures. Mysterious
outsiders can win slavish devotion with a few well-timed tricks or overt uses
of magic.
Powerful creatures, especially dragons, can be found ruling lizardfolk tribes.
Even young dragons or wyrmlings can seem like terrifying gods to lizardfolk.
Adventurers who defeat the lizard king might earn a horde of unwanted worship
ers. Although most lizardfolk are unaligned, their leaders are typically evil. Even
lizardfolk that serve good-intentioned masters behave brutishly and succumb to
their baser instincts more often than not.
Great Feasts and Sacrifices: After capturing creatures, especially humanoids,
lizardlolk throw huge feasts and riotous religious festivities. Their rites
include dancing, chittering. and wrestling. Victims are either cooked and fed to
the tribe or sacrificed to a god. Lizardfolk don't know much about true deities.
Instead, they worship a motley combination of primal spirits and powerful
mundane creatures.
Blackscale Crusher
Large natural humanoid (reptile), lizardfolk
HP 86; Bloodied 43
AC 18. Fortitude 19. Reflex 16. Will 16
Speed 8 (swamp walk)
Level 6 Brute
XP 250
Initiative +6
Perception +4
© Greatdub (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 6 damage, and the bruiser can push the target
1 square.
Trigger: The bruiser takes damage from an enemy.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Close blast 2 (creatures in the blast); +9 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 6 damage, and the target falls prone.
Str 22 (+9) Dex 16 (+6) Wis 12 (+4)
Con 16(+6) Int 5 (+0) Cha 6 M l
Alignment unaligned Languages Draconic
Equipment greatclub
I
LYCANTHROPE
l.ycanthropes shift between human and animal forms, comfortably traveling both in
society and in the wild.
Shapeshifters remain in human form around other creatures, revealing their
bestial nature only when in the company of other lycanthropes or moments
before a kill. The carnivorous creatures are born with a craving for human flesh.
An instinct to survive and the awareness that discovery means death drives
lycanthropes to lie, cheat, steal, and murder.
True lycanthropes are born only to shapeshifter mates, but legends tell a different
story. According to these myths, a lycanthropes bite or a mystic's curse can
infect a mortal with lycanthropy.
S l * ) J 1 AI../1W.1, t /
Masters ofln filtration: Lycanthropes in human form blend easily into crowds.
They use their talents of deception to infiltrate organizations for personal gain, possibly
to grow wealthy or to win access to a specific victim. Some shapeshifters work
for hire. Even a modest-sized group might have werecreature members.
When a lycanthrope gains access to its intended prey, the creature shifts into
hybrid form to gloat before meting out the killing blow. A lycanthrope is typically
patient, content to enjoy the intricacies of the chase. When it feels threatened,
though, it tends to make rash decisions.
A lycanthrope's human form hints at its bestial nature. Wererats are short,
wiry, and naturally fidgety; werewolves have prominent canine teeth and a fierce
gleam in their eyes.
Three Forms for Three Worlds: Lycanthropes live in three distinct worlds:
humanoid society, shapeshifter clans, and animal packs. In cities, they remain in
human form, going to great lengths to avoid
revealing their bestial forms. Only the most
vicious lycanthropes-creatures that revel in
debauchery, theft, and violence-spend
more time than absolutely necessary in civilization.
Among clan members,
lycanthropes form cabals and remain in
their hybrid forms. Shapeshifters that rarely
part from clan society typically embrace a
baser lifestyle as they age, combining the
cruelest characteristics of humankind with
the brutality of beasts. Sometimes, these
cabals take over small villages and enslave
the inhabitants.
Tied to the Moon: When the full moon rises, werecreatures stalk city streets
and wild places alike. Their howls echo across the land, filling settlers with
dread. Families make offerings to Sehanine, goddess of the moon, beseeching
her to protect them from shapeshifters. Silver is associated with the moon, but
it causes werecreatures pain and prevents their wounds from healing as quickly
as normal. Hunting parties intent on slaying a lycanthrope are wise to use silvercoated
weapons.
Rulers of the Underworld: The most urban of lycanthropes, wererats dwell
in packs inside sewers or catacombs. More cunning and materialistic than their
shapeshifter kin, wererats join criminal organizations or start their own. A werei
at might lie a pickpocket, a criminal mastermind, or a spy.
Living on the Fringe: Brutish and feral, werewolves dwell alone or in small
wilderness clans. They frequently run with wolf packs, especially when the moon
is full. They sometimes join bandit gangs or become mercenaries. Werewolves
prefer to stick to the borderlands but occasionally work inside cities. Anyone
who employs a werewolf must be prepared to satisfy the creature's thirst for
human blood.
"The moon rises full
tonight, and I've heard
wolves howling on the
downs. Best lock your
doors."
—Salvana Wrafton
of Winterhaven
Scurrying W e r e r a t Level 3 Skirmisher
Medium natural humanoid (shapechanger). human XP 150
HP 37: Bloodied 18 Initiative+7
AC 17. Fortitude 16, Reflex 14. Will 13 Perception +7 !
Speed 6, climb 4 (rat or hybrid form only) Low-light vision i Jm
TRAITS
Regeneration
The wererat regains 5 hit points whenever it starts its turn and has at least 1 hit point. When
the wererat takes damage from a silvered weapon, its regeneration does not function on its next
turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Dagger (weapon) • At Will
Requirement: The wererat must be in human or hybrid form.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 6 damage, or 2d6 + 6 if the wererat has combat advantage against the target.
© Bite (disease) • At-Will
Requirement: The wererat must be in rat or hybrid form.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d4 + 4 damage. If the target is granting combat advantage to the wererat, it also takes
ongoing 5 damage (save ends). At the end of the encounter, the target makes a saving throw.
On a failure, the target contracts wererat filth fever (stage 1).
MOVE ACTIONS
Rat Scurry • At-Will
Requirement: The wererat must be in rat form.
Effect: The wererat shifts up to its speed.
MINOR ACTIONS
Change Shape (polymorph) • At-Will
Effect: The wererat alters its physical form to appear as a Tiny rat, or a Medium unique human or
Ipfcrtd.
Skills Bluff +6, Stealth +10
Str 10 (+1) Dex 18 (+S) Wis 12 (+2)
Con 1S (+3) Int 13 (+2) Cha 11 (+1)
Alignment evil Languages Common
Equipment dagger
Wererat Filth Fever Level 3 Disease
Those infected by this disease waste away as they alternately suffer chills and hot flashes.
Stage 0: The target recovers from the disease.
Stage 1: While affected by stage 1, the target loses a healing surge.
Stage 2: While affected by stage 2, the target loses a healing surge. The target also takes a -2 penalty
to AC, Fortitude, and Reflex.
Stage 3: While affected by stage 3, the target loses all healing surges and cannot regain hit points.
The target also takes a -2 penalty to AC, Fortitude, and Reflex.
Check: At the end of each extended rest, the target makes an Endurance check if it is at stage 1 or 2.
8 or Lower. The stage of the disease increases by 1.
9-12: No change.
13 or Higher. The stage of the disease decreases by 1.
Frenzied Werewolf Level 6 Brute
Medium natural humanoid (shapechanger), human XP 250 ( T HP 78: Bloodied 39 Initiative +6
AC 18. Fortitude 19. Reflex 18. Will 16 Perception+9 ! m
Speed 6 (8 in wolf form) Low-light vision LV TRAITS , '
Regeneration
The werewolf regains S hit points whenever it starts its turn and has at least 1 hit point. When
the werewolf takes damage from a silvered weapon, its regeneration does not function on its
next turn.
[ STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At-Will
Requirement: The werewolf must be in wolf or hybrid form.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 3 damage, or 2d8 + 8 against a bloodied target, and the target falls prone.
© Bite (disease) • At-Will
Requirement: The werewolf must be in wolf or hybrid form.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 7 damage. At the end of the encounter, the target makes a saving throw. On a failure,
the target contracts werewolf moon frenzy (stage 1).
©Club(weapon) • At-Will
Requirement: The werewolf must be in human or hybrid form.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage, or 2d8 + 9 against a bloodied target,
j Lycanthrope Fury • At-Will
Requirement: The werewolf must be in hybrid form.
Effect: The werewolf uses claw and bite. Then the werewolf takes 5 damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
Change Shape (polymorph) • At-Will
Effect: The werewolf alters its physical form to appear as a Medium wolf, unique human, or
hybrid.
Skills Bluff+8, Intimidate +8
Str 19 (+7) Dex 17 (+6) Wis 13 (+4)
Con 18 (+7) Int 10 (+3) Cha 11 (+3)
Alignment evil Languages Common
Equipment club
We r ewol f Moon Frenzy Level 6 Disease
This disease starts with a fever, which soon becomes u violent and unpredictable rage.
Stage 0: The target recovers from the disease.
Stage 1: While affected by stage 1, the target takes a -2 penalty to Will.
Stage 2: While affected by stage 2, whenever the target becomes bloodied, it makes a melee basic
attack as a free action against an ally adjacent to it.
Stage 3: While affected by stage 3, whenever the target is hit by an attack, it makes a melee basic
attack as a free action against an ally adjacent to it.
Check: At the end of each extended rest, the target makes an Endurance check if it is at stage 1 or 2.
10 or lower The stage of the disease increases by 1.
11-14: No change.
15 or Higher The stage of the disease decreases by 1.
I VI AN I IINOI'I T m
MANTICORE
Flying hunters with leonine bodies, manticores swoop from mountainside lairs to seize
prey. They are vicious, dimwitted b easts that kill for pleasure.
Manticorcs hunt alone or in small prides and prefer earthhound prey. Travelers
who venture near caves or rocky ledges where manticores lair risk death. The
fearsome predators claim expansive hunting grounds, and a settlement could be
annexed into a manticore's territory without warning. Some evil humanoids capitalize
on manticores' predictable hunting behavior. Most people prefer to avoid
the beasts, though, and they go to great lengths to stay clear of potential manticore
habitats.
Voracious Monsters: Manticores eat all types of meat, but they most enjoy
dwarf and human flesh. Poorly guarded caravans and inexperienced hunting
parties make ideal targets. Although a manticore
has vicious teeth, it prefers to attack
with its tail and claws, leaving its fangs for
tearing at the flesh of its kill. A passerby
who comes across a massacre site might
find iron spikes and serrated teeth, sure
signs that at least one manticore was
involved in the attack.
Manticores regularly shed their three
rows of teeth. Finding a tooth warns that
one of the vicious creatures could be
near, but it is also considered an ill omen.
Rampant fear of the winged beasts infects
borderland communities. In such a place, someone who finds a tooth might not
reveal that information, for fear of facing life as a pariah if his or her compatriots
learn of the discovery. And thus, what little warning the settlement might have
had about an impending attack goes unheeded.
Brutish and Violent: Although they're smarter than most beasts, manticores
operate mostly on instinct and their hateful emotions. Much like ogres, manticores
have a reputation as brutish beasts that live in rural areas and end up
under the command of smarter creatures. Manticores have barely enough intelligence
to speak, but they don't often care to. With its short temper and limited
ability to reason, a manticore takes offense at concepts and innuendos it doesn't
understand. When a manticore wants to make a point, it uses claws, teeth, and
spikes rather than words.
Steeds of Evil: Manticores light alongside other evil creatures, often serving
as mounts. Some humanoids, especially hobgoblins, steal and train manticore
cubs. There's no guarantee that the winged beasts won't turn on their trainers,
however. Bribery remains the safest method for making and keeping manticore
allies. The creatures have a strong mercenary streak and accept I«HHI and treasure
in exchange for service. It's not uncommon (or a tribe of goblins or ogres to
"They call a group of
manticores a pride, just
like lions. But there's
nothing proud or noble
about those beasts."
—Kelana Dhoram,
mayor of Moonstair
i % T Uumlrri .t /.
pay tribute to a nearby manticore in hopes of securing the predator's aid in an
attack. A manticore might turn up at the battle, but it fights for its own enjoyment.
If it becomes tired or irritated, the manticore will fly away and leave its
temporary allies to die.
Symbols of Danger: In heraldry and iconography, the manticore represents
peril or viciousness. A sign at an abandoned mine might depict a manticore or a
symbol of a manticore's tooth to warn that the area inside is unstable or dangerous.
Groups of adventurers, mercenaries, or thugs sometimes choose a manticore
as a symbol of their ruthlessness. Warriors who want to look especially tough
hunt down manticores to gather trophies. They wear the beasts' pelts as capes,
siring manticore teeth on necklaces, or turn iron tail spikes into weapons and
adornments.
Devils' Unlikely Allies: Devils make use of manticores, despite the beasts'
unprcdictahlc temperament. Devils claim that Alloces, the Butcher of Nessus,
created the first manticores in experiments that weaved together the flesh of
men, lions, and bats. Although manticores seem more sedate around devils, the
fiends still have to pay or enslave manticores to ensure their service.
MANI I L O K I rF 1" 9 /
Manticore Striker Level 10 Skirmisher
Large natural magical beast XP 500
HP 106: Bloodied S3 Initiative +12
AC 24. Fortitude 23. Reflex 23. Will 20 Perception +13
Speed 6. fly 8
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 7 damage, or 2d10 + 10 with a charge attack.
Effect: After the attack, the manticore shifts up to 2 squares,
•y Tail Spike • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage.
Effect: After the attack, the manticore shifts up to 2 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
>T Spike Counterattack • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy hits the manticore.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The manticore uses tail spike against the triggering enemy. This
attack does not provoke opportunity attacks.
Str 20(+10) Dex 20(+10) Wls16(+8)
Con 18 (+9) Int 4 (+2) Cha 11 (+S)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common
Manticore Impaler Level 11 Brute
Large natural magical beast XP 600
HP 138; Bloodied 69 Initiative+11 J
AC 23. Fortitude 23. Reflex 23. Will 20 Perception +14 /
Speed 6. fly 8 1
STANDARD ACTIONS
Hindered Takeoff
While the manticore is grabbing a creature, it can't fly higher
than 6 squares above the ground.
STANDARD ACTIONS
/
* > /
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 8 damage.
+ Tail Lance • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature): +14 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 6 damage, and the manticore grabs the target (escape DC 19) if it does not have a
creature grabbed. Until the grab ends, the target takes ongoing 5 damage.
Tall Spike • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 6 damage.
MOVE ACTIONS
Prepare to Drop • At-Will
Effect: The manticore flies up to half its speed and pulls a creature it has grabbed with it. This
movement does not provoke opportunity attacks from the grabbed creature, and the manti
core can pull the grabbed creature vertically.
Str 22 (+11) Dex 22 (+11) Wis 18 (+9)
Con 18 (+9) Int 4 (+2) Cha 10 (+5)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common
19HT thmiKri A /.
Level 13 A r t i l l e ry
XP 800 ;
Initiative +12
Perception +14
Manticore Spike Hurler
Large natural magical beast
HP 100; Bloodied 50
AC 27, Fortitude 25. Reflex 26. Will 23
Speed 6. fly 8
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 9 damage.
^ Tail Spike • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +20 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 12 damage.
•i'f Spike Volley • At Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 10 (creatures in the burst); +20 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 9 damage.
Str 21 (+11) Dex 2 2 (+12) Wis 17 (+9)
Con 16 (+9) Int 4 (+3) Cha 12 (+7)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common
Manticore S k y Hunter
Large natural magical beast
Level 13 Soldier (Leader)
XP 800
HP 130; Bloodied 65 Initiative+14
AC 29. Fortitude 26. Reflex 26. Will 23 Perception +14
Speed 6, fly 8
O Shielding Wings • Aura 1
Allies gain a +2 bonus to AC and Reflex while in the aura.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 10 damage, or 2d10 + 12 if the target is marked by the manticore
^TTail Spike • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 6 damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
Threatening Roar (charm) • At-Will
Effect: Close burst 1 (enemies in the burst). The manticore marks each target until the end of the
manticores next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
>T Defender's Spike • At Will
Trigger: An enemy within 5 squares of the manticore and marked by the manticore makes an
attack that doesn't include it as a target.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The manticore uses tail spike against the triggering enemy. This
attack does not provoke opportunity attacks.
Str 23 (+12) Dex 22 (+12) Wis 17 (+9)
Con 18 (+10) Int 4 (+3) Cha 10 (+6)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common
k l t M l l l I I UI ¥ I Q Q
MEDUSA
Medusas are a people of such
hideous aspect that their gazes
render flesh to stone. Lithe
females with snakes for hair and
powerful males whose glances
poison body and mind, they are
deadly adversaries.
Fey creatures believe
medusas are the cursed
descendants of elves, betrayers
who willingly bowed to
Zehir and helped slaughter
an entire city of eladrin.
Human and dwarf sages
think medusas are the
progeny ofyuan-ti and
basilisk blood, created to be
a slave race to the yuan-ti.
Other scholars theorize that
Zehir remade dragonborn
or humans during the chaos
following the Dawn War.
No matter how the medusas
were created, all races
believe them to be unnatural
creatures. Maybe some
truth can be plucked from all
three stories.
Deadly in Different
Ways: Medusa males and
females are inherently different
beyond their gender. All
medusas have scaled bodies, forked tongues, and snakelike eyes, and are resistant
to poison. The similarities end there, however. Males are bald-headed, while
females grow dozens of poisonous snakes from their scalps. Males' eyes project
mind-infecting poison, while females' eyes turn creatures to stone. No female can
turn another female to stone, but only special males are immune to their mates'
petrifying glares.
The sexual dimorphism ofthe race would appear to put the genders on equal
footing. Invariably, however, the females form a matriarchy within which males
fill subservient roles as hunters, guardians, scouts, and mates. Only males that
have immunity to petrification can hope to rise above females in medusa society.
2 0 0 1 A l . „ , . ! . , . A /
Such males are singled out by Females for special treatment from birth, and they
have little sympathy for their brothers.
Domineering and Proud:
Medusas believe that their killing gaze
is evidence that they are destined to
rule over other humanoids. A medusa
is sensitive to its mortality and the
limited distance of its petrifying gaze,
so it chooses its adversaries carefully.
Small medusa clans move through the
wilderness in search of weak settlements
to rule. Individuals settle in
cities to build up criminal guilds and
eventually make a play for power.
Medusas that gain control bully the
"It's easy to underestimate
a male medusa, the one
without the snakes on its
head. Easy, but deadly.
It won't turn you to stone,
but it will tear your mind
apart."
—Vadriar the Sage
populace, quelling dissent with statuary
gardens, venomous snakes in surprising places, and the deaths of those who
speak against them. Some medusas claim godhood and demand worship, while
others tout themselves as oracles.
Medusa Bodyguard
Medium natural humanoid
HP 123; Bloodied 61
AC 28. Fortitude 2S. Reflex 23. Will 24
Speed 6
Resist 10 poison
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bastard Sword (poison, weapon) 4 At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 4 damage, and ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends).
Effect: The bodyguard marks the target until the end of the bodyguard's next turn
•Y Longbow (poison, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 30 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: I d IO + 9 damage, and ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends).
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Mind-Venom Gaze (charm, poison, psychic) • Recharge when the bodyguard hits with bastard
sword
Trigger: An enemy marked by the bodyguard makes an attack that does not include it as a target.
Attack (Immediate Interrupt): Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +1S vs. Will. The attack must
include the triggering enemy as a target.
Hit: 2d6 + 3 poison and psychic damage, and if the target is the triggering enemy, the target is
stunned until the end of its turn.
Skills Bluff 114. Stealth +14
Str 22 (+12) Dex 17 (+9) Wis19(+10)
C M 19(410) Int 12 (+7) Cha 17 (+9)
Alignment evil Languages Common
Equipment bastard sword, longbow
Yuan-ti Allies: Like the yuan-ti, medusas worship Zehir, but the strange
ties between the two races run deeper than religion. Medusas are deeply loyal
to yuan-ti. A medusa's arrogance vanishes in the presence of even one of these
serpentine tyrants. Yuan-ti say medusas owe their existence to them, but this
eerie obeisance goes further than honoring ancestral ties. Kven the snakes atop a
medusa's head bow when a yuan-ti passes.
Level 12 A r t i l l e ry
Initiative +12
Perception +14
Medusa Venom A r r ow
Medium natural humanoid. female
HP 96; Bloodied 48
AC 26. Fortitude 23. Reflex 25. Will 23
Speed 6
Immune petrification; Resist 10 poison
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Serpent Hair (poison) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 6 poison damage, and the target takes a -2 penalty to saving throws until the end of
the medusa's next turn.
® Shortbow (poison, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 30 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 7 damage, and the target takes ongoing 5 poison damage and is slowed (save ends
both).
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Petrifying Stare • At Will
Trigger. An enemy starts its turn within 2 squares of the medusa.
Effect (Opportunity Action): Close blast 2 (triggering enemy in the blast). The target is slowed
(save ends).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is immobilized instead of slowed (save ends).
Second Failed Saving Throw: The target is petrified until one ofthe following conditions is
satisfied.
• The use of an appropriate power, such as divine cleansing.
• The willing kiss of the medusa that petrified the creature (a medusa might do this to gain
information or to luxuriate in the victim's fear before returning it to stone).
• The medusa responsible for the petrification is killed and its blood is applied to the stony
lips of the victim before a full day passes.
Skills Bluff+15. Stealth +17
Str 14 (+8) Dex 2 2 (+12) Wis 17 (+9)
Con 18 (+10) Int 12 (+7) Cha 19 (+10)
Alignment evil Languages Common
Equipment shortbow
Medusa Spirit Charmer
Medium natural humanoid. female
Level 13 Controller
HP 130; Bloodied 6S Initiative +9
AC 27, Fortitude 25, Reflex 25. Will 27 Perception +14
Speed 6
Immune petrification; Resist 10 poison
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Serpent Hair (poison) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 6 poison damage, and the target takes a -2 penalty to saving throws until the end of
the medusa's next turn.
<- Spirit Charm (charm, psychic) • At-Will
Attack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +16 vs. Will
Hit: 1d6 + 6 psychic damage, and the target must end its next turn 2 squares closer to or adjacent
to the medusa or else take 3d6 psychic damage.
Swords to Snakes (fear, illusion) • Encounter
Attack: Area burst 1 within 10 (enemies in the burst); +16 vs. Will
Hit: The target's weapons and implements appear to become snakes, and the target cannot use
weapon or implement powers (save ends).
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<- Stony Glare • At Will
Trigger: An enemy ends its turn within 2 squares of the medusa.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Close blast 2 (triggering enemy in the blast); +16 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The target is petrified (save ends).
Third Failed Saving Throw: The target is petrified until one of the following conditions is satisfied.
• The use of an appropriate power, such as divine cleansing.
• The willing kiss of the medusa that petrified the creature (a medusa might do this to gain
information or to luxuriate in the victim's fear before returning it to stone).
• The medusa responsible for the petrification is killed and its blood is applied to the stony
lips of the victim before a full day passes.
Skills Bluff+17. Stealth +14
Str 14 (+8) Dex 16 (+9) Wis 17 (+9)
Con 18 (+10) Int 19 (+10) Cha 22 (+12)
Alignment evil Languages Common
"The snakes on its head that pass for hair—they're not
just for show. Let one bite you, and you'll find it's that
much harder to resist the medusa's gaze."
—Malaphar of the Golden Wyvern
Ml I I I K .A Titu
MIND FLAYER
The ultimate megalomaniacs, mind flayers use their ability to enslave minds to play pup
peteer to countless thralls while they feast on the brains of less useful creatures. Their goal
is nothing short of world domination.
^
2 0 4 \ t l u m l r o A.I
As ambitious as they are sinister, mind flayers hatch sprawling plots to achieve
dominion. A single mind flayer might control an entire dungeon or settlement: a
small cabal could set its sights on ruling a continent; a city of mind flayers aims
to conquer and reshape the planes.
Mind flayers, or illithids as they call themselves, are the embodiment of
mortals' worst fears. They dwell in darkness and order monsters on foul errands.
They slaughter or enslave multitudes of peaceful creatures and exert total dominance
over prisoners. Mind
flayers have spent centuries
on selective breeding and
magical manipulation experiments
in an attempt to create
the perfect slave race. Their
efforts birthed the githyanki
race, which eventually
escaped the mind flayers'
control. Mind flayers
can control countless
thralls at once. No
one knows how many
worlds have crumbled
under their deadly
embrace, nor how many
innocents have nourished
the mind flayer hordes.
Perhaps the most horrifying
and repulsive
attribute of the illithids
is their physical form,
a grisly mockery of the
humanoid victims from
which they were birthed.
Mind flayers use other
creatures to reproduce.
They implant a juvenile
illithid inside a victim's
skull, where the tadpoleshaped
offspring eats
the creature's brain.
Mind Flayer Thrall Master Level 14 Elite Controller (Leader)
Medium aberrant humanoid XP 2,000
HP 260; Bloodied 130 Initiative+9
AC 28. Fortitude 23. Reflex 27. Will 26 Perception +10 I
Speed 7 Darkvision
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1 I J
STANDARD ACTIONS
©Tentacles • At Will
Requirement: The mind flayer must not have a creature grabbed.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. Reflex. This attack automatically hits a dazed or stunned
target.
Hit: 3d6 + 5 damage, and the mind flayer grabs the target (escape DC 21) if it does not have a
creature grabbed.
4- Manipulate Brain • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the mind flayer); +17 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 4d6 + 10 damage, and the target is stunned until it is no longer grabbed by the mind flayer. If
this attack reduces the target to 0 hit points or fewer, the mind flayer does one of the following.
Eat Brain (healing): The target dies, and the mind flayer regains 20 hit points.
Thrall Surgery (charm): Instead of dropping to 0 hit points or fewer, the target remains at 1 hit
point. It is dominated until the mind flayer dies.
<- Mind Blast (psychic) • Recharge XKQ]
Attack: Close blast S (enemies in the blast); +17 vs. Will
Hit: 3d8 + 10 psychic damage, and the target is dazed (save ends). If the mind flayer scores a
critical hit against the target, the target is dominated instead of dazed (save ends).
Miss: Half damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
Thrall Strike (charm) • At Will (1/round)
Effect: Ranged sight (one ally or creature dominated by the mind flayer). The target makes a
basic attack as a free action.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Teleport Thrall (teleportation) • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy targets the mind flayer with a melee attack.
Effect (Immediate Interrupt): Close burst S (one ally or creature in the burst dominated by the
mind flayer). The mind flayer teleports up to 5 squares and teleports the target to the square it
vacated. The triggering attack targets the target instead ofthe mind flayer.
Skills Arcana +18. Insight +15
Str 14 (+9) Dex 1S (+9) Wis 17 (+10)
Con 10(+7) Int 23 (+13) Cha20(+12)
Alignment evil Languages Deep Speech, telepathy 20
The progeny's Far Realm essence irrevocably alters the creature's form, turning
it into an adult illithid with features that hint at its former occupant. Some mind
llayer cabals search out specific vessels for their young, believing that a powerful
host body makes for a strong illithid.
Solitary Masterminds: With far-reaching plans and a vast pool of thralls,
a mind llayer dips its tentacles into regional affairs without getting involved in
them. The fiend prefers to remain unnoticed, notching milestone after milestone
until its overarching goal is realized. A mind flayer isn't solitary in the sense that
it lives alone. Rather, it abides only the company of mindless thralls and illithids
M I N I ! I I AV I K / 2()'»
Mind Flayer Unseen
Medium aberrant humanoid
Level 18 Lurker
XP 2,000 / R X J
HP 126: Bloodied 63
AC 32. Fortitude 28. Reflex 31. Will 30
Speed 7
Initiative +20
Perception +18
Darkvision i I
TRAITS
Unseen Focus (illusion)
The mind flayer is invisible while it has a creature grabbed.
STANDARD ACTIONS
©Tentacles • At Will
Requirement: The mind flayer must not have a creature grabbed.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +21 vs. Reflex. This attack automatically hits a dazed or stunned
target.
Hit: 1d6 + 6 damage, and the mind flayer grabs the target (escape DC 23) if it does not have a
creature grabbed.
+ Extract Brain (healing) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the mind flayer); +21 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 6d6 + 20 damage, and the target is dazed until it is no longer grabbed. If the attack reduces
the target to 0 hit points or fewer, the target dies and the mind flayer regains 15 hit points.
Mind-Clouding Blast (illusion, psychic) • Encounter
Attack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +21 vs. Will
Hit: 3d8 + 7 psychic damage, and the target is dazed (save ends).
Miss: Half damage.
MOVE ACTIONS
Mental Cloak (illusion, teleportation) • Recharge when an attack hits the mind flayer
Effect: The mind flayer teleports up to its speed, and it becomes invisible until the end of its
next turn.
Skills Arcana +20. Insight +18, Stealth +21
Str 18 (+13) Dex 2 5 (+16) Wis 18 (+13)
Con 12 (+10) Int 23 (+15) Cha 22 (+15)
Alignment evil Languages Deep Speech, telepathy 20
that have goals identical to its own. Ulithids believe all creatures are their inferiors.
To an illithid, other creatures exist for one of three purposes: host vessel,
food, or slave. When a mind flayer aligns with another creature, it has already
plotted how and when it will betray its new ally.
Canny But Not Cowardly: An illithid is intent on keeping its location and
involvement secret until it can claim victory. Its thralls serve as decoys and a
buffer against attack. When a mind flayer's sanctum is breached or when its
plans are at risk of failing, the fiend doesn't hesitate to enter combat or make its
presence known.
Only the most arrogant illithid operates without an escape plan. A mind flayer
rarely risks its life, for it believes that nothing else is more valuable. In fact, numerous
mind flayers become liches or search for other ways to extend their life spans.
Masters in the Underdark: Mind flayers arc most comfortable in the Underdark's
black chasms. They enslave subterranean races and send their thralls into
the harsh topside light to collect victims. Only a few illithid cities exist, in great
caverns where even drow and other formidable Underdark races fear to tread.
2f)t> \ Alilllkli'tl .1 /
Mind flayers of a great city follow the commands of an elder brain-a living,
pulsating conglomeration of the knowledge and mental strength sucked from
dozens or even hundreds of mind flayers that died to create their king. The elder
brain speaks telepathically, giving orders from its briny pool in a well-guarded
section of the city and orchestrating a vast conspiracy of its own design.
Goal Oriented: At its basic level, a mind flayer needs brains for sustenance,
and it prefers to use thralls to collect would-be victims. When first building its
power base, a mind flayer might live hand to mouth lor a while. As an illithid's
legions reach a healthy size, it launches into the heart of its plans. It might collect
arcane writings and items of power to increase its knowledge: it could meddle
in the politics of the surface world; it might even be intent on creating portals to
summon more of its kin from the Far Realm.
The ultimate crown every mind flayer covets is rulership over the planes,
which would be reshaped in the Far Realm's image. Given a chance, illithids
would extinguish the sun, blister the world, warp flesh into aberrant forms, and
rewrite every natural race's history with mad gibbering.
Concordant Mind Flayer Level 19 Controller (Leader)
Medium aberrant humanoid XP 2,400 HP 174; Bloodied 87 Initiative +12 6 \ J
AC 33. Fortitude 29. Reflex 32. Will 33 Perception +1S
Speed 7 Darkvision 1 n STANDARD ACTIONS
©Tentacles • At-Will
Requirement: The mind flayer must not have a creature grabbed.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +22 vs. Reflex. This attack automatically hits a dazed or
stunned target.
Hit: 3d6 + 8 damage, and the mind flayer grabs the target (escape DC 24) if it does not have a
creature grabbed.
| Enthrall Brain (charm) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the mind flayer); +22 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 5d6 + 10 damage, and the target is dazed until it is no longer grabbed. If the attack
reduces the target to 0 hit points or fewer, the target instead has 1 hit point, and it is dominated
until the mind flayer dies.
<• Mind Blast (psychic) • Encounter
Attack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +22 vs. Will
Hit: 3d8 + 10 psychic damage, and the target is dazed (save ends). If the mind flayer scores a
critical hit against the target, the target is dominated instead of dazed (save ends).
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Shared Pain (psychic) • At Will
Trigger: An ally within S squares of the mind flayer takes damage from an attack.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): Close burst 5 (one creature dominated by the mind flayer other
than the triggering ally in the burst). The target takes 20 psychic damage, which ignores any
ofthe target's resistances.
Skills Arcana +21. Insight +20
Str 18 (+13) Dex 17 (+12) Wis 22 (+15)
Con 14 (+11) Int 24 (+16) Cha 26 (+17)
Alignment evil Languages Deep Speech, telepathy 20
MINOTAUR
Minotaurs present the world's other races with a dilemma. On the one side, minotaur
cities and clans can be mighty allies and determined partners in civilizing the world. On
the other, their baffling culture and demon worshiping ways threaten to bring anyone
they meet to ruin.
An old adage says, "No road in a minotaur kingdom runs straight for long." It
refers to the queer civil engineering that minotaurs employ as well as their way
of thinking. The hull-headed brutes' impressive strength and baffling culture is
enough to make most people avoid the creatures.
Minds Like Mazes: Minotaurs approach life as if it were a labyrinth. Taking
an action is stepping onto a path. Roads can lead away from the past, circumnavigate
critical destinations, hit dead ends, or open new passageways. This
moment-by-moment drama isn't only a philosophy: it's an internal decisionmaking
mechanism inherent to minotaurs.
The minotaurs' diplomatic and commercial partners struggle to unravel the
convoluted negotiation style that fuels the creatures' politics and customs. They
debate, bargain, argue, distract, equivocate, and generally appear to procrastinate
for a long time. Then suddenly a decision is made, and they roar into action
with single-minded vigor. The swiftly shifting social cues of aggression and
compliance leave outsiders blundering along completely unaware of the debate's
Minotaur Soldier
Medium natural humanoid
HP 89; Bloodied 44
AC 24. Fortitude 22. Reflex 19. Will 19
Speed 6
Level 8 Soldier
Initiative +8
Perception +11
STANDARD ACTIONS
0 Battleaxe (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 8 damage, and the minotaur uses shield bash against the same target.
MINOR ACTIONS
\ Shield Bash • At-Will (1/round)
Requirement: The minotaur must be using a shield.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 1d6 damage, and the target falls prone.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Goring Toss • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy adjacent to the minotaur shifts.
Attack (Immediate Interrupt): Melee 1 (triggering enemy); +11 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d6 + 5 damage, the target is immobilized until the end of its turn, and the minotaur slides
the target up to 2 squares to a square adjacent to the minotaur.
Str 20 (+9) Dex 14 (+6) Wis 14 (+6)
Con 17 (+7) Int 10 (+4) Cha 13 (+5)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment heavy shield, battleaxe
N V O H 1 Mifll kfa f k .1 /
Minotaur Charger
Medium natural humanoid
HP 94; Bloodied 47
AC 23. Fortitude 23. Reflex 21. Will 20
Speed 6
Level 9 Skirmisher
Initiative +9
Perception +10
Deft Charge
While the minotaur is charging, its movement does not provoke opportunity attacks.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Falchion (weapon) • At Will
Attock: Melee 1 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit; 4d4 + 7 damage.
^ Handaxe (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Coring Rush • At-Will
Trigger. An enemy adjacent to the minotaur deals damage to the minotaur.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Melee 1 (triggering enemy); +12 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 1d6 + 5 damage, and the minotaur can push the target 1 square and shift 1 square to the
square the target occupied. The minotaur can push the target and shift four more times in this
way.
Str 20 (+9) Dex 17 (+7) Wis 13 (+5)
Con 14 (+6) Int 10(+4) Cha14(+6)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment falchion, 4 handaxes
nuanccs. For a minotaur. though, a decision's minutia has far-reaching consequences.
A minotaur believes that each time it agrees to a contract or a condition,
it actively declines taking the opposing path.
"I've known some minotaurs to be honorable, brave, and
stalwart allies. But even some of them gave in to the beast
within during the time I lived among them. Baphomet's
touch is like a curse that dooms the entire race to
savagery, much as some of them try to stave it off."
—Deric Widewanderer
Labyrinthine Lands: Minotaurs prefer landscapes that mimic their worldview.
They feel at home among islands in a web of rivers, interlacing caverns,
jumbled valleys, and other natural features that might at first appear chaotic. In
such locales, minotaurs and their slaves construct their infamous cities. Roads on
open plains twist; halls bend when they could go straight; dead ends, which confound
outsiders, form the foundation of the race's architectural style.
O Unleash the Beast Within • Aura 3
Any ally that starts its turn in the aura gains a +2 power bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls
on attacks made as part of charges until the end of that ally's turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Glaive • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 2d4 + 10 damage, and the magus slides the target up to 2 squares.
Miss: The magus can slide the target 1 square.
® Baphomet's Rage (charm, psychic) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +12 vs. Will
Hit: 1d6 + 4 psychic damage, and the target uses a free action to charge a creature of the
magus's choosing.
?T Crimson Bolt (fire, lightning) • Recharge [X] O
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +12 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d10 + S lightning damage, and the target takes ongoing 5 fire damage and cannot shift
(save ends both).
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Goring Fling • At Will
Trigger: An enemy adjacent to the magus deals damage to the magus.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Melee 1 (triggering enemy); +12 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 1d6 + 4 damage, and the magus pushes the target up to 3 squares.
Skills Bluff+14. Insight +12
Str 18 (+8) Dex 12 (+5) Wis 16 (+7)
Con 16 (+7) Int 15 (+6) Cha 20 (+9)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal, Common
The famous minotaur settlement known as the Labyrinth City of Leng is a
haunting testament to the power of the minotaurs' construction when paired
with the creatures' unique mindset. Hidden in a serpentine volcanic landscape
of mazelike canyons, the massive settlement withstood centuries of war before
collapsing into ruins at the minotaurs' own hands. Now demons, maddened
minotaurs. and ghosts guard the nation's treasures and buried secrets.
Demon Worshipers: Baphomet, known as the Horned King, Demon Prince
of Beasts, and the Minotaur Lord, plays a crucial role in minotaur society. His
creed—"Unleash the beast within"-frees his followers from the moral and
mental complexities of their decisions and teaches them to live by instinct. His
cults honor savagery, wrath, and brute strength. In the Temples of Ire, minotaur
cabalists spill blood in Baphomet's name and engage in cannibalism. Even some
humans, elves, and ores pay secret homage to him.
In about half the minotaur cities, the cult of Baphomet openly seeks converts
and serves an important role in the settlements' armies and defenses. Minotaurs
(hat are infused with demonic blood are driven mad with savagery and grow to
stupendous strength and size.
Level 11 Brute
Initiative +8
Perception +7
Demonic Savage Minotaur
Large natural humanoid
HP 140: Bloodied 70
AC 23. Fortitude 25, Reflex 22. Will 20
Speed 8
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claws • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one or two creatures); +16 vs. AC. If the
minotaur targets only one creature, it can make this attack
twice against that creature.
Hit: 2d6 + 5 damage, and the minotaur grabs the target (escape DC 19)
if it has fewer than two creatures grabbed.
4 Impale • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the minotaur); +14 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 5d8 + 13 damage. The target falls prone and is no longer grabbed by the minotaur.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Goring Assault • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy within 10 squares of the minotaur hits it with a ranged or area attack.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The minotaur charges the triggering enemy.
Str 22 (+11) Dex 16 (+8) Wis 15 (+7)
Con 20 (+10) Int 5 (+2) Cha 7 (+3)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Abyssal. Common
The cult keeps these
bestial monsters in
check and unleashes
them in times of war
or during wild festivals
and bloody contests. In
other minotaur communities,
the cult must
work behind a respectable
facade. So as the
magi summon demons
in the dark, the diabolical
organization works
to win accolades as a
noble fraternity or an
honorable guild.
MUMMY
A mummy embodies the wrath of the dead. It rises from its stillness to avenge a
transgression.
The slow and shuffling gait of a mummy can paralyze a creature with fear. In its
shambling steps, a foe sees not just the present danger but also the inevitability of
death. The inexorable approach of a mummy replaces confidence with dread and
hope with doom.
"Such a fate! To rule a vast empire, die honored and
revered, enjoy a lavish royal funeral.. . and then spend
a thousand years waiting for some fool to come try to
plunder your tomb. No wonder he seemed a little crazed."
—Uldane of Winterhaven
Retribution Fueled: Whether created in the dry desert heat, the sucking
moisture of a desolate bog, or the frozen heights of a lofty mountain, a mummy
exists for vengeance. A number of sins can awaken a mummy, from disturbing its
tomb, despoiling a place sacred to it in life, or the theft of a prized object. Some
mummies seek to avenge less material offenses, such as a loved one marrying
someone the mummy loathes or an unwelcome alliance of the mummy's enemies
Shambling Mummy Level 8 Brute
Medium natural humanoid (undead) XP 3S0
HP 104; Bloodied 52 Initiative +3
AC 20. Fortitude 22. Reflex 17. Will 21 Perception +5
Speed 4 Darkvision
Immune disease; Resist 10 necrotic. 10 poison
TRAITS
Flammable Corpus
Whenever the mummy takes fire damage, it also takes ongoing S fire damage (save ends).
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Rotting Crasp (necrotic) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d8 + 8 necrotic damage, and the target can't regain hit points until the end of the mummy's
next turn.
MINOR ACTIONS
Warding Curse (necrotic) • At-Will
Effect: Ranged 10 (one creature). The target takes S necrotic damage whenever it attacks until
the mummy uses this power again or until the end of the encounter.
Str 19 (+8) Dex 8 (+3) Wis 12 (+5)
Con 14 (+6) Int 6 (+2) Cha 17 (+7)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
S
212 1 Miin»lrr> A /
Moldering Mummy Level 10 Minion Brute
Medium natural humanoid (undead) XP 125
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +4
AC 2 2, Fortitude 24. Reflex 19. Will 2 3 Perception +6
Speed 4 Darkvision
Immune disease; Resist 10 necrotic, 10 poison
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Clutch of the Dead • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); -1-13 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 11 damage, and the mummy grabs the target (escape DC 18) if it does not have a creature
grabbed.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Final Curse
Trigger: An enemy's attack that does not deal fire damage reduces the mummy to 0 hit points.
Attack (No Action): Ranged 10 (triggering enemy); +13 vs. Will
Hit: The target regains half the normal number of hit points from the next healing surge it spends.
Str 19 (+9) Dex 8 (+4) Wis 12 (+6)
Con 14 (+7) Int 6 (+3) Cha 16 (+8)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Mummy Tomb Guardian Level 11 Soldier / /
Medium natural animate (undead) XP 600 l l
H P 111; Bloodied 55 Initiative +6
AC 27. Fortitude 24, Reflex 21. Will 23 Perception +6
Speed 5 Darkvision
Immune disease; Resist 10 necrotic, 10 poison: Vulnerable 5 radiant
Flammable Corpus
When the mummy takes fire damage, it also takes ongoing 5 fire damage (save ends).
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Khopesh (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 10 damage, and the target cannot shift (save ends).
MINOR ACTIONS
Curse of No Escape • At-Will
Effect: Ranged 10 (one creature). The target is slowed until the mummy curses a different creature
or the mummy is destroyed.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Overwhelming Fear (fear) • Encounter
Trigger: An enemy within 10 squares gains line of sight to any tomb guardian for the first time
this encounter.
Attack (No Action): Ranged 10 (triggering enemy); +14 vs. Will
Hit: The target is stunned until the end of the tomb guardian's next turn.
Str 2 2 (+11) Dex 8 (+4) Wis 12 (+6)
Con 15 (+7) Int 6 (+3) Cha 19 (+9)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
U I I M M V
iii life. Sometimes, a dead master's servants awaken it to continue its life's frustrated
ambitions. Great kings and queens of malign power have returned as
mummies to extend their reigns in undeath.
Created to Destroy: Albeit rare, some mummies arise spontaneously
from dry corpses when a particularly provocative transgression touches their
souls in the afterlife. Most mummies, however, possess the power to act after
death because someone wanted them to have it. The long rituals of burial that
Royal Mummy Level 12 Elite Controller (Leader)
Medium natural humanoid (undead) XP 1,400
HP 236: Bloodied 118 Initiative +5
AC 26. Fortitude 24. Reflex 22. Will 26 Perception +9
Speed 4 Darkvision
Immune disease: Resist 10 necrotic, 10 poison
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
O Regal Presence • Aura S
Whenever an ally starts its turn in the aura, the mummy slides that ally up to 2 squares as a free
action.
O Curse of Fear (fear) • Aura 5
Enemies take a -2 penalty to all defenses against the mummy's attacks while in the aura.
Flammable Corpus
Whenever the mummy takes fire damage, it also takes ongoing S fire damage (save ends).
STANDARD ACTIONS
©Scepter(weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature): +17 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 9 damage.
® Plague Chant (necrotic) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +15 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d6 + 6 necrotic damage, and ongoing 5 necrotic damage (save ends). Each time the target
takes this ongoing damage, each ally adjacent to it takes 5 necrotic damage.
^ Grip of Despair (fear, psychic) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +15 vs. Will
Hit: 1d12 + 9 psychic damage, and the target is immobilized and takes a -2 penalty to attack
rolls until the end of the mummy's next turn.
^ Sow Fear and Pestilence • At Will
Effect: The mummy uses plague cha nt and grip of despair.
Grave Terror (fear, psychic) • Encounter
Attack: Close burst 3 (enemies in the burst); +15 vs. Will
Hit: 2d10 + 13 psychic damage, and the mummy pushes the target up to 4 squares.
Miss: Half damage, and the mummy pushes the target up to 2 squares.
MINOR ACTIONS
Enfeebling Curse • At-Will (1/round)
Effect: Ranged 10 (one creature). Whenever the target spends a healing surge, it becomes weak
ened until the end of its next turn. This effect lasts until the mummy uses this power again or
until the target takes an extended rest.
Skills Insight +14. Religion +13
Str 20 (+11) Dex 8 (+5) Wis 16 (+9)
Con 14 (+8) Int 14 (+8) Cha 22 (+12)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
accompany a mummy's entombment
help protect its body from rot.
Soft organs are removed and placed
in special jars, and the corpse is
treated with preserving oils,
herbs, and wrappings. Less
common means of preservation
include freezing a
body, baking it in dry heat, or
using magic.
A mummy's creator usually
seeks to use the creature to crush
the life out of a victim, yet a
mummy is not an easy weapon to
wield. It cannot be forced to behave
in a certain way. Once awakened, a
mummy behaves according to the
will of the amoral animus that gives
movement to the creature's form.
The animus causes a body to do
in undeath what its living essence
might not have consented to in
life. It is wrath incarnate, so even
a minor wrong might be met with
the deadly force of the mummy's
strength and the unwholesome
energy of its curse. The trick to
shaping a mummy's rampage
is imbuing the corpse through
ritual with the proper reason
to rise. This reason draws from the
passionate beliefs and prejudices of the
body's original owner. Once a person creates a mummy, he or she need only stay
out of the way and let the mummy do its job.
Ending a Mummy's Curse: Each mummy awakens with the power to
curse its enemies. Thus, when it dies a second death, it can still have its revenge.
Rituals can remove these debilitating hexes, and the surest way to put an end to a
mummy's affliction is to undo the transgression that caused the corpse to rise.
Redressing the wrong can remove the curse and sometimes cause the
mummy to return to rest. A sacred idol might be replaced in its niche, a stolen
treasure could be returned to its tomb, or a temple might be cleansed of the
evidence of unwelcome blood. More ephemeral or permanent offenses, such
as revealing a secret the mummy wished kept or killing someone the mummy
loved, cannot lie so easily remedied. In such cases, a mummy might slaughter
everyone responsible and still not find its anger sated.
MUMMY F 21
OGRE
Ogres are brutish, stupid, and grand in number. They kill for food and pleasure, often
combining those pursuits.
Big, dumb, brutal, savage. Even though these words accurately describe ogres,
none succeeds in capturing the extent to which the massive humanoids embody
these traits. An ogre smashes a creature's head for laughs and then eats its victim
raw after it forgets how to make fire. If enough parts remain after the brute
has gorged itself, the ogre might make a loincloth from its quarry's skin and a
necklace from any leftover bones. By the time it's finished, the ogre is probably
hungry again.
Legendary Stupidity: Few ogres can count to ten, even with their fingers in
front of them. Most can barely speak a rudimentary form of Giant and know only
a handful of Common words, with "smash," "gimme," and "food" being the most
prevalent. Ogres are easy to fool or confuse, though they smash things they don't
understand. Silver-tongued tricksters who test their talents on these savages typically
end up eating their eloquent words along with an ogre's club.
© Greatclub (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 6 damage.
^ Rock (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 5 damage.
[ Grand Slam (weapon) • Encounter
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 4d10 + 4 damage, and the ogre pushes the target up to 2 squares and knocks it prone.
Miss: Half damage, and the target falls prone.
Str 21 (+8) Dex 14 (+S) Wis 11 (+3)
Con 20 (+8) Int 4 (+0) Cha6(+1)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Giant
Equipment greatclub, 4 rocks
Primitive Wanderers: Ogres live in small, nomadic groups. Various bands
trade or capture members when they meet, depending on how the encounter
goes. Being only slightly more cultured than a pride of lions, ogres lack a true
sense of tribalism. They switch groups easily, especially if the welcoming band is
momentarily flush with food and weapons.
Ogres aren't great crafters. They use pelts for clothing and uproot trees and
boulders as crude tools and weapons. They prefer stone-tipped javelins for
hunting and stone axes for fighting.
(Left to right) ogre hunter,
ogre mercenary, ogre
Ogres don't erect shelters. They sleep in caves, animal dens, or under overhangs
or trees. When they find other forms of shelter, such as a cabin in the
woods, ogres kill the inhabitants and lair there. An ogre with a lair is a lazy lout.
When bored or hungry, it heads out to find something to kill, attacking virtually
anything that crosses its path. Once an ogre has depleted an area of quarry,
it moves on. Ogres often lair near the rural swaths of civilized lands, where
they take advantage of poorly protected livestock, undefended larders, and
unwary farmers.
Bloodthirsty and Casually Cruel: Calling someone an ogre is a grave insult,
and not just because of the race's well-known witlessness. Cruelty is an ogre's
dominant trait. Amoral and brutal, these fiends refrain from slaughtering one
another out of a sense of familiarity and a kind of camaraderie. If an ogre doesn't
kill its quarry straightaway, it saves the hapless creature as a treat for later.
Lacking focus, however, the brute might forget about its captive and allow it to
starve or freeze to death.
Lazy, Surly, and Easily Cowed: As terrible as ogres are, far worse creatures
exist in the world. Such creatures often round up ogres as slaves or willing
servants. Even weaker creatures can frighten an ogre into submission if their
numbers are great enough. Since power rules ogres' lives, they understand
strength and readily bow to domineering opponents. Large ore tribes, giants,
hags, dragons, gnolls, and others employ ogres as warriors and workers. Some
especially bright ogres learn to work for pay and equipment, becoming mercenaries
lor bosses who can tolerate their crude and bloodthirsty behavior.
iii;UI t i\i
Ogre Hunter Level 7 Skirmisher >
Large natural humanoid (giant) XP 300 f / *
HP 84: Bloodied 42
AC 21. Fortitude 20. Reflex 18. Will 17
Speed 8
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +8
Perception +5
© Club (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 6 damage,
•y Javelin (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 +9 damage.
>f + Hurling Charge • Recharge :|][X][H]
Effect: The ogre uses javelin. If its attack hits, the ogre charges as a free action.
MOVE ACTIONS
<- Clear the Ground • At-Will
Attack: Close burst 2 (creatures in the burst); +10 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The ogre pushes the target up to 2 squares.
Effect: If the attack hits any of the targets, the ogre moves up to its speed.
Str 21 (+8) Dex 16 (+6) Wis 15 (+5)
Con 20 (+8) Int 4 (+0) Cha 7 (+1)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Giant
Equipment club, 6 javelins
Level 8 Soldier
XP 350 •//
Initiative +8
Perception +6
Ogre Mercenary
Large natural humanoid (giant)
HP 93: Bloodied 46
AC 24. Fortitude 22. Reflex 19. Will 19
Speed 8
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Morningstar (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage.
Effect: The ogre marks the target until the end of the ogre's next
turn.
>f Handaxe (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 7 damage.
<- Brutal Sweep (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Close blast 2 (creatures in the blast); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 7 damage, and the target falls prone.
Str 2 2 (+10) Dex 15 (+6) Wis 15 (+6)
Con 21 (+9) Int 7 (+2) Cha 8 (+3)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Giant
Equipment 2 handaxes, morningstar
© Greatclub (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit; 4d8 + 5 damage.
>T Rock • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 7 damage.
4 Juggernaut Push • Recharge X ii
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +13 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The ogre pushes the target 1 square and knocks it prone. The ogre then shifts 1 square to
the square the target vacated. The ogre can push the target an additional number of squares
equal to the ogre's speed, shifting an equal number of squares and remaining adjacent to it.
The target takes 1d8 damage for each additional square the ogre pushes it.
Str 24 (+12) Dex 15 (+7) Wis 15 (+7)
Con 21 (+10) Int 4 (+2) Cha 6 (+3)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Giant
Equipment greatclub, 4 rocks
Arena-Trained Ogre Level 14 Brute
Large natural humanoid XP 1,000
HP 173; Bloodied 86
AC 26. Fortitude 27. Reflex 25. Will 24
Speed 8
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +9
Perception +10
© Greataxe (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 3d12 + 8 damage.
4 Vorpal Sweep (weapon) • Recharge ij]
Attack: Close burst 2 (enemies in the burst); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 5 damage, and ongoing 10 damage (save ends).
Skills Intimidate +10
Str 23 (+13) Dex 19 (+11) Wis 17 (+10)
Con 2 3 (+13) Int 8 (+6) Cha 6 (+S)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common, Giant
Equipment hide armor, greataxe
"Brutally strong, absolutely fearless, and dumb as
rocks. That's what makes ogres so useful. . . and so
dangerous."
—Rothar of the Seven-Pillared Hall
— ^ mini r 11U
OOZE
Among the more peculiar creatures in the world, formless oozes squeeze through dank
underground passages, mindlessly feeding on creatures and objects that dissolve in their
acidic bodies.
Similar to a goopy melding of vermin and natural hazard, oozes are a nuisance
and a danger. Ordinary folks know the creepy creatures exist and follow a simple
rule: If you see an ooze, go the other way. Survivors swear by the maxim. Of
course, oozes aren't always easy to spot, because the sludgy predators tend to
cling to ceilings and seep from unlikely crevices.
Ooze
While squeezing, the ooze moves at full speed rather than half
speed, it doesn't take the -5 penalty to attack rolls, and it doesn't
grant combat advantage for squeezing.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Slam (acid) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit' 2d6 + 1 damage, and ongoing 5 acid damage (save ends).
MOVE ACTIONS
Flowing Form • At-Will
Effect: The ochre jelly shifts up to 4 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Split • Encounter
Trigger: The ochre jelly becomes bloodied.
Effect (No Action): The jelly splits into two creatures, each with hit points equal to one-half its
current hit points. Effects on the original ochre jelly do not apply to the second one.
Str 13 (+2) Dex 8 (+0) Wis 12 (+2)
Con 11 (+1) Int 1 (-4) Cha 1 (-4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Lurk in the Dark: Oozes dwell in tunnels, caverns, and sewers. They slink
along the ground, drip from walls and ceilings, spread across the bottoms of
underground pools, and squeeze through narrow tunnels. The dark and damp
keep the creatures comfortable, and they shun areas with light or extreme temperatures.
Other underground creatures easily avoid oozes. Bats or stirges even
live in rooms surrounding an ooze's lair. More intelligent cave-dwellers, such as
ropers, wait for creatures to wander into an ooze's domain and capitalize on the
situation to snag an easy meal.
2 7 0 l m , a i
STANDARD ACTIONS
Green S l i me
Medium natural beast (blind, ooze)
Level 4 Lurker
XP 175
HP 47; Bloodied 23 Initiative +9
AC 18. Fortitude 17. Reflex 17. W i l l 14 Perception +2
Speed 4. climb 4 Blindsight 10
Immune blinded, gaze effects; Resist 5 acid; Vulnerable 5 fire, 5 radiant
Ooze
While squeezing, the ooze moves at full speed rather than half speed, it doesn't take the -5 penalty
to attack rolls, and it doesn't grant combat advantage for squeezing.
® Slam (acid) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. Reflex
Hit: 5 acid damage, and ongoing 5 acid damage (save ends).
4 Engulf (acid) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d6 + 3 acid damage, and the slime grabs the target (escape DC 18). Until the grab ends,
the target takes ongoing 10 acid damage. Attacks that hit the slime deal half damage to the
slime and half damage to a single creature grabbed by the slime.
Skills Stealth +10
Str 11 (+2) Dex 16 (+5) Wis 11 (+2)
Con 17 (+5) Int 1 (-3) Cha 1 (-3)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
TRAITS
Everything Is Food: Oozes don't really think. Even insects have a better
sense of tactics and self-preservation. Consequently, the creatures are direct
and predictable. An ooze finds something, attacks it, and eats it. Every variety of
ooze secretes digestive acids that dissolve materials. Most can consume flesh and
wood (albeit slowly), but a few are capable of eating through metal and stone.
Oozes are drawn to movement and warmth, which means they frequently eat
creatures. They also consume the grime that coats dungeons, so an immaculate
passage is a likely sign that an ooze lairs nearby. When an ooze is sated, it falls
into a torpor and remains motionless on the ground. Since not all oozes digest all
substances, some have coins, metal gear, bones, or debris suspended inside their
bodies. A slain ooze can be a windfall for its killers.
Death Is Slow: An ooze dissolves its prey slowly. Some varieties, such as the
gelatinous cube, anesthetize their meals first, a process that numbs victims and
muddies their senses. Most oozes don't, though, and their meals die in agony as the
creature's acid digests bits of flesh at a time. The upside of these torturous, digestive
deaths is that a morsel's comrades might rescue him before he's fully consumed.
Easy to Trick: Though oozes aren't capable of aligning with creatures,
they sometimes end up fighting for or alongside others after being lured to a
particular cellar or cave. Clever monsters might keep oozes around to defend
passageways or dispose of refuse. Likewise, an ooze could be enticed into a pit,
where its captors feed it only enough to keep it from coming after them. Crafty
creatures place torches and flaming braziers in prime spots to dissuade an ooze
from leaving a particular tunnel or room.
Unknown Origins: Some oozes are found in nature, but nobody knows
where they originate from. Phenomena and magical experimentation have been
known to create such creatures. Similarly, failed attempts at performing a powerful
ritual could cause an ooze to spontaneously appear. The creatures are simple
to summon as well. So even inexperienced spellcasters can bring these creatures-
uncontrolled-into battle at a moment's notice.
Gelatinous Cube
Large natural beast (blind, ooze)
Level 5 Elite Brute
XP 400 ii HP 156; Bloodied 78 Initiative
AC 17, Fortitude 18. Reflex 16. Will 15 Perception +3
Speed 3. climb 3 Blind, blindsight 5
Immune blinded, gaze effects; Resist 5 acid
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
Ooze
While squeezing, the ooze moves at full speed rather than half
speed, it doesn't take the -5 penalty to attack rolls, and it doesn't
grant combat advantage for squeezing.
Translucent
The cube is invisible until seen (Perception DC 25) or until it attacks. A creature that fails to
notice the cube might walk into it, automatically being hit with engulf.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Slam (acid) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d6 + 9 acid damage, and the target is immobilized (save ends).
4 Engulf (acid) • At-Will
Requirement: The cube must have no more than two creatures grabbed.
Attack: Melee 1 (one or two creatures); +8 vs. Reflex
Hit: The cube grabs the target (escape DC 15) and pulls the target into its space. Until the grab
ends, the target takes ongoing 10 acid damage and is dazed. When the cube moves, it pulls
with it any creature grabbed by it, and the creature remains grabbed and within the cube's
space. This movement does not provoke an opportunity attack from the grabbed creature.
Str 14 (+4) Dex 14 (+4) Wis 13 (+3)
Con 18 (+6) Int 1 (-3) Cha 1 (-3)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
I
b r .la>. A /
TRAITS
Level 8 Elite Brute
XP 700
Initiative +6
Black Pudding
Large natural beast (blind, ooze)
HP 218; Bloodied 109
AC 20. Fortitude 22. Reflex 20. Will 18
Speed 4, climb 3 Blind, tremorsense 10
Immune blinded, gaze effects; Resist 15 acid
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
Perception +4 # /
Ooze
While squeezing, the pudding moves at full speed rather than half
speed, it doesn't take the -5 penalty to attack rolls, and it doesn't
grant combat advantage for squeezing.
STANDARD ACTIONS
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
0 Slam (acid) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 4d6 + 6 acid damage.
Effect: Before or after the attack, the pudding shifts up to its speed.
Engulf (acid) • At-Will
Attack: Close blast 3 (creatures in the blast); +11 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 4d6 + 6 acid damage, and the pudding grabs the target (escape DC 16).
\ Melt (acid) • At-Will
Effect: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the pudding). The target takes 2d6 + 15 acid damage
and loses a healing surge. It takes 10 extra acid damage if it has no healing surges.
Split • At Will
Trigger An enemy hits the pudding with a weapon attack.
Effect (No Action): A black pudding spawn appears in the unoccupied square closest to the
pudding.
Str 15 (+6) Dex 14 (+6) Wis 11 (+4)
Con 19 (+8) Int 1 (-1) Cha 1 (-1)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Black Pudding Spawn
Medium natural beast (blind, ooze)
Level 8 Minion Brute
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +6
AC 20, Fortitude 22. Reflex 20, Will 18 Perception +4
Speed 4, climb 3 Blind, tremorsense 10
Immune blinded, gaze effects; Resist I S acid
M I N I O N
Ooze
While squeezing, the pudding moves at full speed rather than half speed, it doesn't take the -5
penalty to attack rolls, and it doesn't grant combat advantage for squeezing.
STANDARD ACTIONS
0 Slam (acid) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 10 acid damage, and the pudding shifts up to its speed.
Str 15 (+6) Dex 14 (+6) Wis 11 (+4)
Con 19 (+8) Int 1 (-1) Cha 1 (-1)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
oo/i r 223
ORC
Ores put their faith in two things: their bloodthirsty, one eyed god and the blind savagery
of destruction.
Hate beats in their hearts, and rage runs through their veins. What thoughts
emerge From the ignorant darkness of their minds are bent on ruination and
death. They are ores, and in their wakes, ash and bone remain.
Faith in Destruction: Ores worship Gruumsh, and theirs is a primal religion
of brutality and bloodletting. Ores hear their god's voice in the storm's howl,
recognize his wrath in the earth's quaking, and see his face in an avalanche's
wreckage. Ores slaughter the weak to earn (iruumsh's favor, and they pluck out
one of their own eyes to prove their faith in him.
Tribes Like Plagues: Orc tribes scourge the land, devouring or driving
off beasts and plundering villages. As each region is consumed, the monsters
move on. A tribe divides into roving bands that search abroad for the choicest
new hunting grounds, leaving a small contingency behind to receive returning
parties. As the ores filter in, they bring trophies and news of targets ripe for
attack. Once the tribe is whole, the savages set out, desecrating the land and its
creatures as they cut a path to their new territory. On rare occasion, a tribe's
leader chooses to hold onto a particularly defensible lair for decades, and its ores
must range far into the countryside to sate their appetites.
(Left to right) orc storm shaman, orc archer, orc reaver
Battletested Ore
Medium natural humanoid
Level 3 Soldier
XP 150
HP SO; Bloodied 25
AC 19. Fortitude 17. Reflex 15. Will 13
Speed 6 (8 when charging)
Initiative +5
Perception +1
Low-light vision ! • j
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Battleaxe (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: I d IO + 5 damage, or I d IO + 10 with a charge attack.
>F Handaxe (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 5 damage.
<c* Hacking Frenzy (weapon) • Recharge K I i
Attack: Close burst 1 (enemies in the burst); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 5 damage, and the orc marks the target until the end of the ore's next turn.
Effect: The orc grants combat advantage until the start of its next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Savage Demise
Trigger. The orc drops to 0 hit points.
Effect (Free Action): The orc takes a standard action.
Str 18 (+5) Dex 14 (+3) Wis10(+1)
Con 18 (+5) Int 8 (+0) Cha 9 (+0)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common, Giant
Equipment scale armor, heavy shield, battleaxe, 4 handaxes
Scavengers, Not Builders: Ores on the move grudgingly camp in the open,
but their instinct is to fortify for long residence. Ruins, cavern complexes, and
defeated foes' villages are easily converted into strongholds. Ores build only for
defensive purposes, such as erecting log-and-earth walls to encircle huts. If ores
choose to live in their victim's homes, they close the gaps they exploited in the
settlement's defenses. Ores don't set traps around their lairs unless the makings
lor the trap existed prior to the tribe's arrival. Instead, the brutes build spiked
walls and dig pits to ensnare invaders and buy sentries time to alert the tribe.
Although capable of ironworking and some subtler arts, ores prefer the strongarm
method of procurement. After savaging a colony, they pick it and its dead
clean of usable items and cart the booty back to their base. The skeletal remains
ofthe settlement are then set alight.
Ores often range through the hills and mountains that dwarves prefer. The
countless battles between the two races have awarded ores control over a handful
of dwarven holds and mines. Yet even when controlling a prime location, ores
fail to do anything with it. The real pleasure had been in wresting control of the
site from the dwarves. One unusually industrious orc sent slaves into a mine for a
season, but the weaklings had the temerity to keep dying.
Bloodthirsty Cannibals: No one can negotiate with ores unless perched in
a position of overwhelming strength. Ores see weakness outside their tribe as
an exploitable source of food and treasure. Even weaker orc tribes are prey for
stronger ones. Powerful creatures can direct an orc tribe's ferocity through intimidation.
but none can ho|H' for Pine control or discipline.
Ore Savage
Medium natural humanoid
Level 4 Minion Brute
XP 44
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +3
AC 16. Fortitude 16. Reflex 14. Will 12 Perception +1
Speed 6 Low-light vision
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Handaxe (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 8 damage, or 12 with a charge attack.
® Handaxe (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged S (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 6 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Savage Demise
Trigger The orc drops to 0 hit points.
Effect (Free Action): The orc takes a standard action.
Str 16 (+5) Dex 13 (+3) Wis9(+1)
Con 13 (+3) Int 8 (+1) Cha 8 (+1)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common, Giant
Equipment hide armor, 4 handaxes
HP 42; Bloodied 21
AC 16. Fortitude 16. Reflex 18. Will 14
Speed 6
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +6
Perception +2
Low-light vision
© Handaxe (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 6 damage.
>T Longbow (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 30 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 6 damage, and the orc can push the target 1 square.
-K- Clustered Volley (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 20 (creatures in the burst); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 6 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Savage Demise
Trigger: The ore drops to 0 hit points.
Effect (Free Action): The orc takes a standard action.
Str 15 (+4) Dex 18 (+6) Wis 10 (+2)
Con 12 (+3) Int 8 (+1) Cha 9 (+1)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common, Giant
Equipment leather armor, handaxe, longbow, 30 arrows
\
Orc Archer Level 4 A r t i l l e ry
Medium natural humanoid XP 175
s- J J ft 1 I.....I..*. A t 1
Ore Reaver
Medium natural humanoid
HP 63; Bloodied 31
AC 19. Fortitude 18. Reflex 18. Will 16
Speed 6 (8 when charging)
Level 5 Skirmisher
XP 200
Initiative +7
Perception +3
Low-light vision
Charging Mobility
While charging, the ore gains a +4 bonus to all defenses.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Battleaxe (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 8 damage.
Effect: After the attack, the ore can shift 1 square.
>T Javelin (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 6 damage, and the ore can push the target 1 square.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Blood-Crazed Charge • Encounter
Trigger: The ore hits an enemy.
Effect (Free Action): The ore charges an enemy.
Savage Demise
Trigger: The ore drops to 0 hit points.
Effect (Free Action): The ore takes a standard action.
Str 18 (+6) Dex 17 (+5) Wis 13 (+3)
Con 15 (+4) Int 8 (+1) Cha8(+1)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common, Giant
Equipment hide armor, battleaxe, 4 javelins
Ores have no qualms about eating any flesh, including that of other ores. Cannibalism
within a tribe remains taboo except in special savage rites of passage,
such as when an ore eats its own eyeball in a religious ceremony or an incoming
chief feasts on his predecessor to symbolize virility. Ores are especially fond of
how fattened animals taste. When the savages slaughter a farm's residents, they
might eat the victims right away and save the animals for later meals. Ores have
no patience for animal husbandry, though, and such creatures are soon stewing
in their own juices.
"Don't try to tell me there's a soul that can be redeemed
inside that monster. An ore's little better than a demon."
—Caiphas, paladin of Pelor
77
Orc Rampager
Medium natural humanoid
HP 90; Bloodied 45
AC 18. Fortitude 20. Reflex 18. Will 16
Speed 6
Berserk Flailing
While the orc is bloodied and can take opportunity actions, any enemy that starts its turn adjacent
to the ore takes 5 damage.
STANDARD ACTIONS
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Orc Pummeler
Medium natural humanoid
STANDARD ACTIONS
Level 6 Controller
XP 250
© Heavy Flail (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 6 damage.
4 Rampage • At-Will
Effect: The ore shifts up to 3 squares and can use heavy flail against three enemies during the shift.
Handaxe (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 6 damage, and the orc can push the target 1 square.
Savage Demise
Trigger: The orc drops to 0 hit points.
Effect (Free Action): The ore takes a standard action.
Str 21 (+8) Dex 14(+5) Wis10(+3)
Con 20 (+8) Int 8 (+2) Cha 8 (+2)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common, Giant
Equipment leather armor, 4 handaxes, heavy flail
© Stone Maul (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage, and the target falls prone.
<•• Earthshaking Slam • Encounter
Attack: Close burst 2 (creatures in the burst); +9 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 3d6 + S damage, and the target is dazed until the end of the ore's next turn.
Effect: The orc pushes each target up to 2 squares.
4 Intercepting Swat • Recharge ::)[>: II
Trigger: An enemy makes an opportunity attack against the orc.
(Effect (Free Action): The orc uses stone maul against the triggering enemy.
Savage Demise
Trigger: The ore drops to 0 hit points.
Effect (Free Action): The orc takes a standard action. IStr 21 (+8) Dex 14 (+5) Wis 10 (+3)
Con 20 (+8) Int 8 (+2) Cha 8 (+2)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common, Giant
Equipment scale armor, stone maul
» )U\ V
HP 76; Bloodied 38
AC 20. Fortitude 20. Reflex 17. Will 16
Speed 6
Initiative +5
Perception +3
Low-light vision
-4
Ore S t o rm Shaman
Medium natural humanoid
Level 6 A r t i l l e ry
XP 250
/ f 1
, | A H
HP 54; Bloodied 27
AC 20, Fortitude 16. Reflex 19. Will 18
Speed 6
Initiative +7
Perception +6
Low-light vision | h 1M 'MM STANDARD ACTIONS
© Scimitar (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 8 damage.
® Lightning Strike (lightning) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 30 (one creature); +11 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d10 + 8 lightning damage, and one enemy within S squares of the target takes 5 lightning
damage.
-JJ- Vengeful Whirlwind (lightning, thunder, zone) • Recharge when first bloodied
Attack: Area burst 1 within 10 (enemies in burst); +11 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d10 + 4 lightning and thunder damage, and the target falls prone. Then the shaman slides
the target up to 2 squares.
Miss: Half damage, and the shaman can slide the target 1 square.
Effect: The burst creates a zone that lasts until the end of the ore's next turn. Any enemy that
ends its turn in the zone takes 10 thunder and lightning damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Wind Walk • Encounter
Trigger: The shaman is first bloodied.
Effect (Free Action): Until the end of the encounter, the shaman gains a fly speed of 8 but must
land or fall at the end of each move.
Savage Demise
Trigger: The orc drops to 0 hit points.
Effect (Free Action): The ore takes a standard action.
Str 16 (+6) Dex 19 (+7) Wis 16 (+6)
Con 12 (+4) Int 8 (+2) Cha 9 (+2)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common, Giant
Equipment hide armor, scimitar
"Whether it calls on some violent primal spirit, on a
savage primordial of wind and thunder, or on a demon
prince of storms, an orc storm shaman is a force to be
reckoned with."
—Oak Warden Sharasta
OTYUGH
An otyughs unsavory scent sets creatures to retching, an advantage the detritus dwelling
beast exploits.
These noisome monsters live in filth, subsisting on dung, rot, and carrion as they
await fresh meat.
Rank Homes: Otyughs snuggle into squishy nests of decaying matter, which
provide excellent camouflage for their mottled flanks. Heaps of moldering
plants, piles of maggot ridden bodies, pools of unidentifiable slime, and pits
brimming with excrement are favored nesting sites. An otyugh can survive for
some time on the gruesome gruel a well-steeped domicile provides.
Otyughs wallow in stagnant swamps, scum-filled ponds, and damp forest
dells. The smell of civilization can attract the creatures as well. Fresh mass
graves, city sewers, village middens, and manure-filled animal pens are sure to
host one or more otyughs. The solitary creatures prefer to live far from others
of their kind, but they don't become territorial unless suitable nesting sites are
scarce or fresh prey wanders past.
Ambush Hunters: An otyugh is a natural ambusher. Its massive bulk and
ungainly, three-legged form rule out speed-based attacks, but the rest of its body
reeks of predatory ability.
The beast sinks into its
wallow. Its center tentacle,
which is outfitted
with two eyes and nostrils,
barely breaches the
pit's surface as it watches
a creature approach.
Then it silently draws
back and awaits the
perfect moment to
strike. With a great
splash, an otyugh s
other two tentacles,
well muscled and
equipped with claws,
whip out to smash into
startled prey. Even the
creature's scent aids it in
battle, as disoriented and
sickened foes stumble
around trying to settle
their bellies long enough
to unsheathe their
weapons.
S- ) in \ ll<intl«»* A . J
Strong but Needy Guardians: With plentiful sustenance, otyughs are
content to grow fat in their wallows. Not even the desire to mate stirs one from
its putrid stew. This sedentary nature and their hunger lor refuse make otyughs
valuable guard beasts and disposal units for unwanted guests. They are ideal
pets for keeping interlopers from poorly guarded sewers, middens, dungeons,
cesspools, oubliettes, and moats. However, some would-be masters underestimate
how plentiful a supply of waste, carrion, and victims is needed to keep an
otyugh from wandering off. And the creatures do not tame well, especially when
peckish. Thus, more than one "trained" otyugh has eaten its master
when its wallow has turned bland or tasteless.
Otyugh Level 7 Soldier
Large natural beast XP 300
HP 82: Bloodied 41 Initiative +5 A
AC 23. Fortitude 22. Reflex 16. Will 19 Perception +11 1
Speed 5, swim 5 Darkvision f
TRAITS • • • f t
0 Otyugh Stench • Aura 1
Living enemies take a -2 penalty to attack rolls while in the aura
STANDARD ACTIONS
©Tentacle • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 6 damage, and the otyugh pulls the target up to 2 squares and grabs it (escape DC 16).
4 Diseased Bite (disease) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 8 damage, or 1d10 +12 against a creature grabbed by the otyugh. In addition, at the
end of the encounter, the target makes a saving throw. On a failure, the target contracts lesser
otyugh filth fever (stage 1).
Skills Stealth +13
Str 2 2 (+9) Dex 11 (+3) Wis 16 (+6)
Con 18 (+7) Int 1 (-2) Cha S (+0)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Lesser Otyugh Filth Fever Level 7 Disease
Those infected by this disease waste away as they alternately suffer chills and hot flashes.
Stage 0: The target recovers from the disease.
Stage 1: While affected by stage 1. the target loses a healing surge.
Stage 2: While affected by stage 2, the target loses a healing surge and takes a -2 penalty to AC,
Fortitude, and Reflex.
Stage 3: While affected by stage 3, the target loses all healing surges and cannot regain hit points.
The target also takes a -2 penalty to AC, Fortitude, and Reflex.
Check: At the end of each extended rest, the target makes an Endurance check if it is at stage 1 or 2.
10 or Lower. The stage of the disease increases by 1.
11-15: No change.
16 or Higher The stage of the disease decreases by 1.
Charnel O t y u g h Level 10 Elite Soldier
Large natural beast XP 1,000
TRAITS
MINOR ACTIONS
Initiative -1-7
Perception +13
Darkvision
HP 212; Bloodied 106
AC 26. Fortitude 27. Reflex 21. W i l l 24
Speed S, swim 5
Resist S necrotic
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
0 Otyugh Stench • Aura 1
Living enemies take a -2 penalty to attack rolls while in the aura.
© Charnel Lash (necrotic) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 8 damage, and ongoing 5 necrotic damage (save ends). The otyugh pulls the target up
to 2 squares and grabs it (escape DC 18).
| Rotting Bite (disease, necrotic) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 6 necrotic damage, and ongoing 5 necrotic damage (save ends). In addition, at
the end of the encounter, the target makes a saving throw. On a failure, the target contracts
greater otyugh filth fever (stage 1).
<• Charnel Frenzy (necrotic) • Recharge X Ii]
Attack: Close burst 3 (enemies in the burst); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 8 damage, and ongoing 5 necrotic damage (save ends).
I Life Leech (healing, necrotic) • At-Will (1/round)
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature grabbed by the otyugh); +13 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 10 necrotic damage, and the otyugh regains 5 hit points.
Skills Stealth +10
Str 2 2 (+11) Dex 11 (+S) Wis 16 (+8)
Con 18 (+9) Int 6 (+3) Cha 5 (+2)
Alignment evil Languages -
Strange Mutations: Soaked in disease and decay, an otyugh gradually
evolves in appearance to complement its environment. An otyugh living in offal
turns a mult ihucd brown, and its skin grows mottled. The skin of a creature
dwelling in a pond scum-covered pool gains a bright green sheen and blisters
that mimic the pool's slime bubbles.
An otyugh's propensity for mutating makes it particularly susceptible to
Far Realm influences. If it eats an aberrant creature's flesh, the pit dweller
rapidly morphs into a much larger, more intelligent, and deadlier neo-otyugh.
It also gains psychic and telepathic abilities. Neo-otyughs form dangerous
partnerships with allies, bargaining their services for payments in food they
consider delicacies.
Neo Otyugh
Huge aberrant magical beast
Level 11 Elite Controller
XP 1,200
TRAITS
HP 232; Bloodied 116 Initiative +6
AC 2S. Fortitude 26. Reflex 20. Will 23 Perception +14
Speed 7, swim 7 Darkvision
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
O Otyugh Stench • Aura 2
Living enemies take a -2 penalty to attack rolls while in the
aura.
Threatening Reach
The neo-otyugh can make opportunity attacks against enemies
within 4 squares of it.
lBHIIHHtanHHHHHHMHHHHflHIUHMHMHHBHI
Attack: Melee 4 (one creature); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 9 damage, and the neo-otyugh pulls the target up to 3 squares and grabs the target
I(MOP« D C H )L
<- Massive Maw of Decay (disease, necrotic) • At Will
Attack: Close blast 2 (creatures in the blast); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage, or 2d6 + 10 against a creature grabbed by the neo-otyugh, and ongoing 5
necrotic damage (save ends). In addition, at the end of the encounter, the target makes a saving
throw. On a failure, the target contracts greater otyugh filth fever (stage 1).
MINOR ACTIONS
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Greater Otyugh Filth Fever Level 11 Disease
^ Disgusting Lure (charm, psychic) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +14 vs. Will
Hit: 2d8 psychic damage, and if the target does not end its next turn adjacent to the neo-otyugh,
the target takes 1S psychic damage.
\ Body Shield • At Will
Trigger: An enemy hits the neo-otyugh while the neo-otyugh has a creature grabbed.
Attack (Immediate Interrupt): Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the neo-otyugh); +14 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The triggering enemy's attack hits the grabbed creature instead of the neo-otyugh.
Skills Stealth +16
Str 23 (+11) Dex 13 (+6) Wis 18 (+9)
Con 20 (+10) Int 7 (+3) Cha 1S (+7)
Alignment evil Languages telepathy 10
Those infected by this disease waste away as they alternately suffer chills and hot flashes.
Stage 0: The target recovers from the disease.
Stage 1: While affected by stage 1, the target loses a healing surge.
Stage 2: While affected by stage 2, the target loses a healing surge and takes a -2 penalty to AC,
Fortitude, and Reflex.
Stage 3: While affected by stage 3, the target loses all healing surges and cannot regain hit points.
The target also takes a -2 penalty to AC, Fortitude, and Reflex.
Check: At the end of each extended rest, the target makes an Endurance check if it is at stage 1 or 2.
12 or Lower The stage ofthe disease increases by 1.
13 18: No change.
19 or Higher The stage of the disease decreases by 1.
OWLBEAR
Owlbears are terrifying,
nocturnal predators that
inhabit the forests of the
world and the Feywild,
where they hunt to satisfy
their voracious appetites.
Their haunting cries echo
through valleys and across
plains, warning to travelers
that they are on the
prowl.
An owlbear's innocuous
name belies its deadly
ferocity. These hunters
possess more cunning
than an owl and more
ferocity than a bear, and
they have a ravenous
appetite far exceeding
either animal.
Level 8 Brute
XP 350
Initiative +6
Perception +12
Darkvision
Young Owlbear
Large fey beast
HP 106: Bloodied 53
AC 20. Fortitude 21. Reflex 19. Will 20
Speed 7
STANDARD ACTIONS
0 Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 3 damage.
+ Double Attack • At Will
Effect: The owlbear uses claw twice. If both attacks hit the same
creature, the owlbear grabs it (escape DC 16) if the owlbear has fewer
than two creatures grabbed.
4 Beak Snap • At-Will
Effect: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the owlbear). The target takes 2d8 + 11 damage
<c" Dazing Hoot • Recharge when first bloodied
Attack: Close blast 3 (creatures in the blast); +11 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The target is dazed (save ends).
Str 19 (+8) Dex 14 (+6) Wis 16 (+7)
Con 16 (+7) Int 2 (+0) Cha 10 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Stunning Screech • Encounter
Trigger: The owibear is first bloodied.
Attack (Free Action): Close blast 3 (creatures in the blast); +11 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The target is stunned (save ends).
Str 20 (+9) Dex 14 (+6) Wis 16 (+7)
Con 16 (+7) Int 2 (+0) Cha 10 (-1-4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
An owibear has a powerful body and bristly fur similar to that of a bear, but
they also possess feathers, a wicked beak, and sharp talons. Despite its exotic
appearance, an owibear is not a magical beast, the creation of some mad wizard
who sought to combine the bear and owl. Whatever its origin might be, the
owibear is a species unto itself, occurring with the same regularity that one
might encounter other predatory beasts.
Consummate Predators: Gifted with the vision of an owl, an owibear
emerges from its den around sunset and hunts into the darkest hours of night.
The creature's den, usually a cave, a ruin, or a hollow tree, is littered with shattered
bones and offal, the ghastly remains of the creature's prey. When prey is
plentiful, an owibear drags its kills back to its lair, where it adorns nearby trees
or rocks with the corpses. This flesh attracts scavengers, giving the owibear more
opportunities to catch prey. The scent of blood and rotting meat is thick near an
owlbear's lair. Aside from the baleful hoot of the creatures, the smell is usually
the only other warning that an owibear is near.
Owlbcars hunt alone or in mated pairs. If quarry is plentiful, a family of owl-
Ix-ars might remain together for longer than is required to rear cubs. Otherwise,
the irascible creatures typically go their own ways as soon as their young are
ready to hunt. Few things can dissuade a hungry owibear from attacking. An
owibear is a stubborn predator that fights without a sense of self-preservation
l iven when it is about to die, an owibear still keeps its victim clenched tightly in
lis claws, snapping at the fin* will) its bone-crushing beak.
1 I W I I I I All
Owibear Lc
Large fey beast
ivel 8 Elite Brute
XP 700
HP 212; Bloodied 106 Initiative +6 J
AC 20. Fortitude 22. Reflex 18. Will 20 Perception+12 Ml
Speed 7 Darkvision f /
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1 If
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); -1-12 vs. AC
Hit: 4d6 + 6 damage.
+ Double Attack • At Will
Effect: The owibear uses claw twice. If both attacks hit the same creature,
the owibear grabs it (escape DC 16) if the owibear has fewer than two
creatures grabbed.
\ Beak Snap • At-Will
Effect: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the owibear). The target takes 4d8 + 22 damage.
Trained Owlbear
Large fey beast
HP 96; Bloodied 48
AC 24. Fortitude 23. Reflex 22. Will 20
Speed 7
Level 9 Soldier
XP 400
Initiative +8
Perception +7
Darkvision
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); -1-14 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 8 damage.
<- Thunderous Shriek (thunder) • Recharge X [01
Attack: Close burst 2 (creatures in the burst); +12 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 4d6 + 5 thunder damage, and the target is knocked prone.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Guardian Claw • At Will
Trigger: An enemy adjacent to the trained owlbear makes an attack that does not include it
Attack (Opportunity Action): Melee 1 (triggering enemy); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 8 damage.
Miss: 5 damage.
Str 19 (+8) Dex 14 (+6) Wis 16 (+7)
Con 16 (+7) Int 2 (+0) Cha 10 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Supernatural Powers: Despite resembling fairly mundane animals, an
owlbear possesses some extraordinary powers based on the environment in
which it lives. All owlbears possess a magical call, and each species' call has a different
effect. During the night, an owlbear hoots or screeches to declare territory,
search for mates, or to flush prey terrain that is hazardous or has no escape route.
Savage Pets: An owlbears carnivorous and violent nature doesn't rule out the
ability to train them. Owlbears are difficult to tame, but with enough time and
food, a person can train an owlbear to recognize him or her as a master. Owlbears
are used as guard beasts and mounts, though even a trained owlbear can
still be dangerous.
An elf community sometimes encourages owlbears to den beneath their
treetop village, using the beasts as a natural defense during the night. Hobgoblins
favor owlbears as war beasts when they manage to control them. A starved
owlbear might show up in a gladiatorial arenas, where it eviscerates foes with
ruthless efficiency. Large humanoids. such as hill or frost giants, sometimes keep
owlbears as pets and playmates.
Mmi\Ui\ .1 /
Wind-Claw Owibear Level 11 Elite Controller
Large fey beast (air) XP 1,200 .'£4
HP 228; Bloodied 114
AC 25, Fortitude 25. Reflex 21, Will 23
Speed 7
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
© Wind Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 8 damage, and the owibear slides the target up to 2 squares and knocks it prone.
Miss: The owibear can slide the target 1 square.
4 Disembowel • At Will
Effect: The owibear uses wind claw twice against one creature. If both attacks hit, that creature is
stunned until the end of the owlbear's next turn.
snap • MHHHHHHHHHBI
Effect: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the owibear). The target takes 4d10 +16 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<• Wind Howl • Encounter
Trigger: The owibear is first bloodied.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Close blast 5 (creatures in the blast); +14 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The owibear pushes the target up to 3 squares and knocks it prone.
Miss: The owibear can push the target 1 square.
Str 2 2 (+11) Dex 16 (+8) Wis 18 (+9)
Con 18 (+9) Int 2 (+1) Cha 10 (+5)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
HP 280; Bloodied 140
AC 28. Fortitude 28. Reflex 23. Will 24
Speed 7 (ice walk)
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative
Perception +15
Darkvision
© Winterclaw (cold) • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 14 cold damage.
Effect: The target is slowed until the end of the owlbear's next turn,
j Double Attack • At-Will
Effect: The owibear uses winterclaw twice. If both attacks hit the same creature, that creature is
immobilized (save ends).
Aftereffect: The target is slowed (save ends).
<• Frost Wail (cold) • Recharge when first bloodied
Attack: Close blast 5 (creatures in the blast); +17 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 1d10 + 5 cold damage, and the target is immobilized (save ends).
Str 24 (+14) Dex 14 (+9) Wis 16 (+10)
Con 20 (+12) Int 2 (+3) Cha 12 (+8)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
1 I W I I I I Al l Yr * in
PURPLE WORM
Massive burrowing creatures, purple worms are feared for their ability to swallow
enemies whole. They are capable of burrowing through solid rock and leave huge tunnels
in their wake.
Purple worms are unintelligent beasts attracted to loud noises. They have no
regard for other creatures, often interrupting battles, tearing through cities, or
disrupting mining operations. Most purple worms are found in the Underdark or
in rocky regions near mountains.
Ravenous Hunger: A purple worm is a voracious beast that is large enough to
swallow a giant whole. Because a purple worm usually goes several days without
eating, it tends to gorge when it finds
food. A purple worm's emergence is
difficult to predict, and the creature
is prone to showing up at the worst
possible times. Many underground
civilizations, such as those of the
drow, the duergar, and the mind
flayers, maintain special wards
around their fortresses and cities to
deter the great beasts.
A purple worm is widely regarded
as a living natural disaster. The
creatures are engines of chaos and
destruction. Many Underdark races
will sabotage their enemies' wards
against the worms, leaving a settlement
vulnerable to attack. A worm cares nothing for whom it helps or hinders.
A purple worm is motivated only by hunger, so the only predictable characteristic
of its attacks is that it favors larger groups over smaller ones. Dwarves have
learned to take advantage of this behavior, luring the worm out with a large
group only to slay it with artillery and massive siege weapons.
Weapons and Tools: A few people have discovered ways to turn purple
worms into weapons. Stories tell of powerful spellcastcrs who specialized in
charm and enchantment and were able to magically seize control of the creatures.
The talcs recount how these spcllcasters could direct the worms at their
enemies, wiping out entire cities or armies with a single worm.
Rumors also circulate that some drow priestesses hold worms under their
sway and use them for defense in remote areas where reinforcements aren't
available. Dwarves are known to use purple worms for mining and tunnelbuilding,
yet despite centuries of effort, the beasts have never been tamed or
domesticated. All attempts to control the beasts eventually end in disaster.
Boons of the Worm: When a purple worm burrows through the ground, it
consumes earth and rock, breaking down the substances and quickly excreting
"Purple worms are among
the largest beasts found in
the world, enormous brutes
driven by nothing but
hunger and the instinctive
drive to tunnel, to consume,
to destroy."
—Zardkeran
of Forgehome
b r
them. Hard substances, such as valuable metals and gems, remain within
their bodies for weeks or months. A brave or foolhardy treasure hunter might
attempt to hunt down a purple worm in hopes of claiming the treasures
within its gizzard. A worm's body also has a boon to offer: Drow and assassins
value the poison that a purple worm carries in its stinger.
A burrowing purple worm creates new corridors and highways throughout
the Underdark. And, because a purple worm rarely returns to one of its
tunnels, such passageways arc usually safe from the beasts, as long as an
interloper remains quiet. Areas that are rich in prey become interlaced with
complex tunnel systems as a result of several worms hunting the area. It's not
long after a purple worm Ibrges a tunnel that smaller Underdark denizens
begin to move into the tunnel to do their own hunting.
I'llUI'll WlIMM Fli9
Adult Purple W o rm
Huge natural beast (blind)
Level 14 Solo Brute
XP 5,000
Initiative +12
Perception +11
Blindsight 10,
tremorsense 10
HP 560: Bloodied 280
AC 28. Fortitude 28, Reflex 26. Will 24
Speed 6, burrow 6 (tunneling)
Immune blinded, gaze effects
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
Ponderous
The purple worm can take immediate actions while stunned,
dazed, or dominated.
Blooded Frenzy
While bloodied, the purple worm takes an extra minor action during
its turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 4d8 + 8 damage.
+ Devour Whole (acid) • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +17 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 3d10 + 7 damage, and the target is swallowed (escape DC 21). While swallowed, the target
does not occupy a square and has neither line of sight nor line of effect to anything except the
worm and other creatures swallowed by the worm; in addition, nothing has line of sight or
line of effect to the target except other creatures swallowed by the worm. If the target attacks
the worm using a close or an area attack, that attack targets all other creatures swallowed by
the worm. While swallowed, the target takes 30 acid damage at the end of its turn. When the
effect ends or the worm drops to 0 hit points, the target appears in an unoccupied square of its
choice adjacent to the worm.
MINOR ACTIONS
i Fling • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +17 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 3d10 + 8 damage, and the purple worm slides the target up to 4 squares,
j Poison Stinger (poison) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 damage, and ongoing 15 poison damage (save ends).
Regurgitate • At-Will
Effect: One creature swallowed by the purple worm appears in a square ofthe worm's choice
within 4 squares of it. That creature is no longer swallowed and takes 3d10 + 8 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
I Thrash • At Will
Trigger: An attack hits the purple worm.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Melee 3 (one or two creatures); +17 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d12 + 5 damage, and the purple worm pushes the target up to 6 squares.
Str 25 (+14) Dex 20(+12) Wis19(+11)
Con 20 (+12) Int 2 (+3) Cha 4 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Mixisfrrs A /.
HP 728; Bloodied 364
AC 33. Fortitude 33. Reflex 31. Will 29
Speed 8. burrow 8 (tunneling)
Immune blinded, gaze effects
Saving Throws +5; Action Points 2
Initiative H7
Perception +14
Blindsight 10. ,
tremorsense 10 •
TRAITS <.»1
Ponderous \
The purple worm can take immediate actions while
stunned, dazed, or dominated.
Blooded Frenzy
While bloodied, the purple worm takes an extra minor action
during its turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +24 vs. AC
Hit: 4d8 + 9 damage, and the purple worm shifts up to half its speed.
I Devour Whole (acid) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +22 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 3d10 + 8 damage, and the target is swallowed (escape DC 24). While swallowed, the target
does not occupy a square and has neither line of sight nor line of effect to anything except the
worm and other creatures swallowed by the worm; in addition, nothing has line of sight or
line of effect to the target except other creatures swallowed by the worm. If the target attacks
the worm using a close or an area attack, that attack targets all other creatures swallowed by
the worm. While swallowed, the target takes 30 acid damage at the end of its turn. When the
effect ends or the worm drops to 0 hit points, the target appears in an unoccupied square of its
choice adjacent to the worm.
MOVE ACTIONS
4 Barrel Through • At Will
Effect: The purple worm shifts up to its speed. Each time the purple worm enters a square adjacent
to any enemy for the first time during the move, it makes the following attack against that
enemy.
Attack: Melee 1; +22 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage, and the purple worm pushes the target up to 2 squares.
MINOR ACTIONS
4 Stinger Impalement (poison) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +24 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 8 damage, and the purple worm slides the target up to 4 squares. The target takes
ongoing 10 poison damage (save ends).
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Thrash • At Will
Trigger: An attack hits the purple worm.
Attack (Immediate Reaction): Melee 3 (one or two creatures); +22 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d12 + 11 damage, and the purple worm pushes the target up to 6 squares.
Str 2 S (+16) Dex 2 3 (+1S) Wis 21 (+14)
Con 2 2 (+1S) Int 2 (+5) Cha 4 (+6)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
i.I 11, i n i t i . • I, i i r1 ^I A I
RAKSHASA
Cunning masters of illusion, rakshasas are cruel, intelligent humanoids that resemble
tigers. Rakshasas enjoy luxury and seldom appear without a veil of illusion to disguise
their feline forms.
Rakshasas have mastered the power of illusion, and they use that power to
conceal their catlike forms while living among other races. A rakshasa is one of
the most intelligent and cunning humanoids that one will ever encounter, though
a person is rarely aware that he or she is dealing with a rakshasa. Avaricious and
self-serving, a rakshasa is capable of unspeakable evil in the pursuit of whatever
it covets, be that wealth, power, influence, or hedonistic pleasure. To attain its
goals, a rakshasa will ruin, injure, or
kill anyone in its path.
Masters of Misdirection:
A rakshasa conceals its true form
and adopts whatever guise serves it
best. Typically, it masquerades as a
noble or a wealthy merchant,
using money
and clever lies to
manipulate other
creatures into doing
its bidding. Rakshasas
serve as villains and
masterminds; they rarely
face enemies unless they want
to and unless backup plans are
ready should an encounter go
awry. Rakshasas prefer misdirection
over combat, and they
use their powers of illusion
to turn potential adversaries
against each other. When a
rakshasa can't avoid battle,
it becomes a fierce and
ruthless foe. A rakshasa
uses illusion to distract
and deflect enemies,
wearing them down
and then striking
when its foes are
weakest.
"I can see your nightmares and present them to your eyes.
I can also show you your heart's deepest desires, or rip
your throat out with my claws. And you think to toy
with me?"
—Ashatra, rakshasa mage
STANDARD ACTIONS
© longsword (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); -1-20 vs. AC. The rakshasa makes two attack rolls and uses either
result.
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage, and the rakshasa marks the target until the end of the rakshasa's next
t W .
® Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +20 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 6 damage, and ongoing 10 damage (save ends).
MINOR ACTIONS
Deceptive Veil (illusion) • At-Will
Effect: The rakshasa disguises itself to appear as a Medium humanoid until it uses deceptive veil
again or until it drops to 0 hit points. Other creatures can make a DC 35 Insight check to discern
that the form is an illusion.
Illusory Ambush (illusion) • Encounter
Effect: The rakshasa becomes invisible, and an illusion of it appears in its square. The transition
is indiscernible to observers, and the illusion lasts until the start of the rakshasas next turn
or until a creature attacks the illusion. After the illusion appears, the rakshasa shifts up to its
speed.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Tiger Pounce (teleportation) • At-Will
Trigger. An enemy marked by and within 5 squares of the rakshasa shifts or makes an attack
that does not include it as a target.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The rakshasa teleports up to its speed and uses claw against the trig
gering enemy. If claw hits, the target also falls prone.
Str 20 (+12) Dex 18 (+11) Wis 18 (+11)
Con 14 (+9) Int 12 (+8) Cha 14 (+9)
Alignment evil Languages Common
Equipment scale armor, heavy shield, longsword
Rakshasa Archer Level 15 Artillery
Medium natural humanoid XP 1,200
HP 110: Bloodied 55 Initiative+12
AC 28. Fortitude 24. Reflex 26. Will 25 Perception +16 I
Speed 6 Low-light vision w m
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +20 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 6 damage, and ongoing 5 damage (save ends).
® Longbow (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +22 vs. AC. The rakshasa makes two attack rolls and uses
either result.
Hit: IdIO + 9 damage.
?T Double Attack • At-Will
Effect: The rakshasa uses longbow twice, making each attack against a different target,
•y Ghost Arrow (necrotic, weapon) • Recharge X Jl]
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +20 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d10 +18 necrotic damage, and the target cannot spend healing surges (save ends).
MINOR ACTIONS
Deceptive Veil (illusion) • At-Will
Effect: The rakshasa disguises itself to appear as a Medium humanoid until it uses deceptive veil
again or until it drops to 0 hit points. Other creatures can make a DC 35 Insight check to discern
that the form is an illusion.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Illusory Escape (illusion) • Recharge when first bloodied
Trigger: An enemy makes a ranged attack against the rakshasa.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The rakshasa becomes invisible, and an illusion of it appears in its
square. The transition is indiscernible to observers, and the illusion lasts until the start of the
rakshasa's next turn or until a creature attacks the illusion. After the illusion appears, the rakshasa
shifts up to its speed.
Str 17 (+10) Dex 20 (+12) Wis 18 (+11)
Con 14 (+9) Int 12 (+8) Cha 14 (+9)
Alignment evil Languages Common
Equipment longbow, 20 arrows
A Life of Luxury: Most rakshasas love luxury and vice. For this reason, they
often impersonate nobles, royalty, and other wealthy individuals. One of a rakshasa's
favorite tactics is to infiltrate a noble house under the guise of a servant
or a distant relative. Under this facade, the rakshasa studies the noble in charge
of the house before eventually killing and replacing him or her. A rakshasa's
self-indulgence is perhaps its one true weakness. A rakshasa will often blindly
endanger itself in the pursuit of new pleasures.
Once a rakshasa has acquired a position of wealth and influence, it ruthlessly
maintains that position. It disposes of anyone who threatens to reveal its identity,
even if it must leave a trail of bodies in its wake. This fierce defense of one's status
and wealth makes larger groups of rakshasas unable to work closely together. A
single community rarely has enough wealth to satiate the desires of more than a
few rakshasas. When rakshasas work together, the size of a group rarely exceeds
three, for larger numbers inevitably lead to violent infighting.
Reincarnation: Upon its death, a rakshasa is immediately reincarnated,
retaining all the memories and knowledge of its former lives. This trait is perhaps
the main source of a rakshasas cunning. A rakshasa has lifetimes to learn from
its mistakes, and each rakshasa has the cumulative wisdom of a thousand lifetimes,
giving it first-hand knowledge of history and the experience from tens of
thousands of schemes. During its various incarnations, a rakshasa might learn
many languages and skills that it can put to use against its adversaries.
Death is no barrier against a rakshasa taking revenge upon those that wrong
it. When a person slays a rakshasa, it's usually a matter of time before the creature
shows up to exact its vengeance. Rakshasas are also linked to a race of
immortal beings called devas. Sages believe that rakshasas originate from evil
devas who reincarnated in a new form that marked their vice and wickedness.
Over time, the number of rakshasas has grown as more and more devas have
succumbed to temptation. Few rakshasas ever seek the redemption necessary to
reincarnate as a deva once more.
Rakshasa Mage
Medium natural humanoid
Level 16 Controller
XP 1,400
HP 1 S3: Bloodied 76
AC 30. Fortitude 26. Reflex 29. W i l l 28
Speed 6
Initiative +10
Perception +11
Low-light vision mJm STANDARD ACTIONS I
©Claw(teleportation) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +21 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 10 damage, and the rakshasa teleports the target up to 3 squares.
Miss: The rakshasa can teleport the target 1 square.
-J!- Misleading Visions (illusion, psychic) • At-Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 5 (enemies in the burst); +19 vs. Will
Hit: 2d10 +11 psychic damage, and the rakshasa slides the target up to 4 squares.
Miss: The rakshasa can slide the target 1 square.
-)!• Visions of Terror (fear, illusion, psychic) • Recharge X ) 0
Attack: Area burst 1 within S (enemies in the burst); +19 vs. Will
Hit: 3d10 + 13 psychic damage, and the target is immobilized (save ends).
Miss: Half damage, and the target is slowed until the end of the rakshasa's next turn.
MINOR ACTIONS
Deceptive Veil (illusion) • At-Will
Effect: The rakshasa disguises itself to appear as a Medium humanoid until it uses deceptive veil
again or until it drops to 0 hit points. Other creatures can make a DC 36 Insight check to discern
that the form is an illusion.
Persistent Image (illusion) • At-Will
Effect: The rakshasa creates an illusion of a Medium or smaller object or creature in an unoccupied
square within 10 squares of it. The illusion can be animate, but it does not produce noise.
The illusion lasts until the end of the rakshasas next turn. A creature that succeeds on a DC 22
Insight check can see through the illusion.
Sustain Minor: The illusion persists until the end of the rakshasa's next turn, and the rakshasa
. an move the illusion up to 6 squares.
Sti I) (+9) Dex 14 (+10) Wis 16 (+11)
Con 17 (+11) Int 24 (+15) Cha 21 (+13)
Alignment evil I anguages Common
ROPER
Ravenous ropers jut up from the ground or hang from cavern ceilings. They look like
stalagmites or stalactites until prey draws near, at which point they lash out with tentacles
and pull quarry toward their toothy maws.
Ropers are methodical hunters that inhabit caves and passageways that are frequented
by smaller creatures. A roper creeps into position and hides itself amid
the rock. A roper's lair is safe only to creatures that have reached an understanding
with the resident roper. A roper might have specific tastes, preferring to eat
elves or humans over beasts or less civilized humanoids. When a roper kills
a creature that has valuables, it devours the treasure, which it keeps inside its
gizzard to help with digestion.
M t l 1 U J I M . L M , I /
Impaling Roper Level 10 Lurker ^
Large elemental magical beast (earth) XP 500 / ^ fl
HP 84; Bloodied 42
AC 24. Fortitude 23. Reflex 22. W i l l 19
Speed 2. climb 2 (spider climb)
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +13
Perception +9
Darkvision
©Tentacle • At-Will
Attack: Melee 10 (one creature); +13 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d8 + 5 damage.
Effect: The roper grabs the target (escape DC 26). Until the end of
the roper's next turn, the roper gains resist 20 to all damage from any
of the target's attacks. While the target is grabbed, any creature can
attack the tentacle in the target's square. The tentacle uses the roper's defenses. An attack
against a tentacle does not deal damage or otherwise affect the roper, but on a hit, the grab ends.
4 Impale • At-Will
Attack: Melee 10 (one creature grabbed by the roper); +13 vs. Reflex
Effect: The roper pulls the target up to 10 squares to a square adjacent to it.
Hit: 4d10 + 5 damage, and the grab ends.
Miss: Half damage, and the grab ends.
Skills Stealth +14
Str 21 (+10) Dex 18 (+9) Wis 18 (+9)
Con 18 (+9) Int 11 (+5) Cha6(+3)
Alignment evil Languages Primordial
Deal Makers: Ropers might look like brainless beasts, but they're fairly intelligent
and frequently make agreements with other creatures that live near them.
These arrangements are usually truces between ropers and other underground
denizens. For example, rather than fight a roper and lose numbers to it, a drow
patrol might agree to bring a roper a prisoner or treasure as payment for passage.
Canny Underdark creatures use the presence of ropers to thin the numbers in a
group of intruders. A creature might lure a party into a cavern of ropers and then
attack anyone a roper doesn't grab. Ropers have long life spans, so a deal with
a roper might extend for several gcnerations-as long as each side continues to
honor the agreement. A humanoid community might be required to pay a seasonal
or yearly tribute to appease a roper.
Slow to Act, Quick to Kill: Since ropers live in a dormant state most of the
time, they don't share the voracious appetite that leads many dungeon monsters
to attack anything they see. A roper waits until the time is right—until the perfect
victim wanders by. It might wait for large traveling parties to pass, looking for
a smaller group or a lone traveler. Once it does strike, the roper drags enemies
toward its maw to devour them quickly. When facing a group, it hopes that
seeing the grisly fate of the first victim will cause the others to retreat.
I.iving Treasure Troves: Adventurers and treasure hunters seek out ropers
because of the wealth of gems and magic trinkets stored within the creatures'
gizzards. Tales of roper treasure troves usually neglect to mention that a roper
acquires such valuables over many generations of slaying travelers and adventurers.
Thus, it's common lor a townspcrson or explorer to underestimate the power
of a roper when he or she sets out to kill one. A roper sometimes regurgitates
a lew gems onto the lloor near its hiding spot. It waits patiently, sometimes for
TRAITS
Cave Roper Level 12 Elite Controller
Large elemental magical beast (earth) XP 1,400 /
Initiative +7
Perception +9
Darkvision
HP 252: Bloodied 126
AC 26. Fortitude 26. Reflex 21. W i l l 23
Speed 2, climb 2 (spider climb)
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
Tentacle Release
Before a creature makes an attack roll against the roper, it can
choose to target one of the roper's tentacles. The tentacles use the
same defenses as the roper. If the attack hits, it does not deal damage
or otherwise affect the roper, but one of the roper's grabs end (of the
attacker's choice).
Stony Body
The roper can retract its tentacles and closes its eye and mouth to resembles a natural rock
formation. While the roper is on a horizontal rock surface, a creature must succeed at a DC 28
Perception check to see through the roper's disguise.
STANDARD ACTIONS
©Tentacle • At-Will
Requirement: The roper must have fewer than two creatures grabbed.
Attack: Melee 10 (one creature); +15 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 9 damage, and the roper grabs the target (escape DC 20). Until the grab ends, the
target is weakened.
4 Double Attack • At-Will
Effect: The roper uses tentacle twice.
4 Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the roper); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 4d12 + 12 damage.
Miss: Half damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
4 Reel • At Will (1/round)
Attack: Melee 10 (each creature grabbed by the roper); +17 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The roper pulls the target up to 5 squares.
Skills Stealth +12
Str 19 (+10) Dex 12 (+7) Wis 16 (+9)
Con 22 (+12) Int 11 (+6) Cha9(+S)
Alignment evil Languages Primordial
weeks, until a foolhardy humanoid comes along, notices the gems, and bends
over to recover the treasures.
Born in the Elemental Chaos: Although ropers are found throughout the
caves and tunnels of the world, they hail from the Elemental Chaos. There, they
cluster into huge colonies. Creatures inhabiting the Elemental Chaos are wary
of a migrating earthmote called the Spired Hell, where hundreds of ropers live.
When this earthmote crashes into another piece of land, ropers spread out across
the new landscape. After stripping the area of living creatures, they return to the
Spired Hell and hibernate until they crash into a new destination.
They Share Memories: A roper reproduces asexually and passes on all its
memories to its offspring. As a result, a roper that has lived in one cave for its
entire life can remember distant lands, and even other planes. If a roper is brilH-d
Crag Roper Level 15 Elite Soldier ^
Large elemental magical beast (earth) XP 2,400 /
HP 304: Bloodied 152 Initiative +10
AC 31. Fortitude 29. Reflex 24. W i l l 26 Perception +11
Speed 2, climb 2 (spider climb) Darkvision
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
0 Lashing Tentacles • Aura 5
Any enemy that enters the aura or starts its turn there is marked
by the roper until it is no longer in the aura. Enemies marked by the
roper cannot be marked by other creatures while the enemies are in
the aura.
Stony Body
The roper can retract its tentacles and close its eye and mouth to resemble a natural rock formation.
While the roper is on a horizontal rock surface, a creature must succeed on a DC 30
Perception check to see through the roper's disguise.
STANDARD ACTIONS
©Tentacle • At-Will
Attack: Melee 10 (one creature); +18 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d8 + 11 damage, and the roper pulls the target up to 5 squares.
Double • At-Will fl^HIHljHHHfeHI
Effect: The roper uses tentacle twice.
4 Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the roper); +20 vs. AC
Hit:4d12 + 18 damage.
Miss: Half damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
4 Reel • At-Will (1/round)
Attack: Melee 10 (each creature grabbed by the roper): +20 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The roper pulls the target up to 5 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Tentacle Retaliation • At Will
Trigger: An enemy marked by the roper makes an attack that doesn't include it as a target.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The roper uses tentacle against the triggering enemy.
Skills Stealth +13
Str 22 (+13) Dex 12 (+8) Wis 18 (+11)
Con 24 (+14) Int 14 (+9) Cha 9 (+6)
Alignment evil Languages Primordial
with treasure or a delectable living creature, it might reveal information or secrets
from its ancient memories. A story that every roper knows (yet few will share) tells
of the ropers' creation. The tale claims that the first ropers sloughed off from the
rocky flesh ofthe primordial Vezzuvu, the Burning Mountain. At first, the ropers
were fast and hot, like lava, but eventually they cooled and became the creatures
they are today. Ropers believe that one day Vezzuvu will return and reignite them
and call upon them to serve as his forces against the gods.
"It looks like a cursed stalagmite! It has no right to be this
terrifying!"
—Last words of Agroth of the Winterbole
r i i i u
RUST
MONSTER
Rust monsters are the bane
of underground societies
and subterranean adven
turers. Their appetite for
metals leads them to attack
travelers and destroy magic
items.
The ecology and habits
of a rust monster have
made the creatures a
pestilence upon civilizations
that rely upon
metal. A rust monster's
saliva and the substance
it excretes from its carapace
are highly corrosive
and can break down
metals quickly through
rapid oxidation. These
liquids are harmless to
flesh but cause metal to
corrode upon contact.
The chemical is so powerful
that some races
work to harvest it for the removal of degraded metal in dilapidated structures.
The difficulty in harvesting a rust monster's excretions makes a single vial ofthe
substance rare and valuable.
Metal Eaters: A rust monster's diet consists primarily of metal. Refined
metals, especially iron, steel, gold, silver, and platinum, are its favorite source of
nutrients. For this reason, a rust monster will attack travelers and adventurers
laden with armor, weapons, and magic items. In the absence of refined metal, a
rust monster consumes raw ore, leading it to inhabit mines and old ore refineries.
A rust monster is an unintelligent beast that acts on instinct alone: it pursues a
source of metal if it has even a small chance of acquiring food and escaping alive.
The availability of food has an effect on the number of offspring that a pair of
rust monsters can produce. In areas where metal is abundant, rust monsters can
produce swarms of young, while in areas where food is sparse, they might have
only a few offspring. A rust monster infestation can quickly become unmanageable,
potentially wiping out a settlement. For this reason, people act quickly to
eliminate rust monster nests.
bI L a r \
Scourge of Civilization: Rust monsters typically dwell underground and
gravitate toward mines, so dwarves, duergar, and other subterranean cultures
consider them a pestilence on civilization. A rust monster might feed on mining
equipment, metal support beams, or mine cart rails, disrupting operations and
potentially causing the death of those working there. A group of rust monsters
might devour the support beams for a dam holding back an underground lake.
In the worst case, a locustlike swarm of rust monsters could wash over a subterranean
city and, in a matter of hours, leave nothing behind but rubble and death.
Although a single rust monster is a minimal threat, once they grow numerous,
only magic is likely to halt their advance. Some civilizations develop
complex warding rituals to keep rust monsters away, but these magical defenses
are expensive to perform, and rust monsters have a knack for finding ways
through the wards. Some dwarven settlements have warning systems that allow
clerics and spellcasters time to perform a defensive ritual before rust monsters
overwhelm a town's defenses. When the early warning systems are disrupted,
though, it can mean disaster for a settlement that relies only on magic wards.
Rusting Defense
Whenever an attack using a metal weapon hits the rust monster, the weapon used in the attack
is rusting until the end of the encounter. While the weapon is rusting, attacks with the weapon
take a -1 penalty to attack rolls. If the weapon used to attack the rust monster is already rusting,
the penalty to attack rolls worsens by 1 (to a maximum penalty of -5).
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 5 damage, if the target is wearing heavy armor, the armor is rusting until the end of
the encounter. While the armor is rusting, the target takes a -1 penalty to AC. If the target is
wearing armor that is already rusting, increase the penalty to AC by 1 (to a maximum penalty
of-5).
Effect: The rust monster shifts 1 square.
+ Devour Metal • Recharge if the power misses
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature wearing or wielding a rusting item); +9 vs. Reflex
Hit: The rusting item is destroyed. If the item was magical, residuum worth the item's market
value can be retrieved from the rust monster after the creature is slain.
Str 8 (+2) Dex 20 (+8) Wis 1S (+5)
Con 10 (+3) Int 2 (-1) Cha 12 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Residuum Sources: Although most humanoids regard rust monsters as a
plague, the creatures do offer a hoon to anyone who manages to slay them. A rust
monster often consumes magic items, and as it devours the metals of an object,
its body stores deposits of residuum created by the decomposition of the item.
Residuum, the valuable substance used in magic item creation, is prized by merchants
and smiths, who hire specialized hunting parties to collect the material.
Devious malcontents sometimes surreptitiously unleash rust monsters in armories
or magic vaults and then offer to exterminate the creatures in exchange for
the residuum stored in the monsters' bellies.
Rusting Defense
Whenever an attack using a metal weapon hits the rust monster, the weapon used in the attack
is rusting until the end of the encounter. While the weapon is rusting, attacks with the weapon
take a -1 penalty to attack rolls. If the weapon used to attack the rust monster is already rusting,
the penalty to attack rolls worsens by 1 (to a maximum penalty of -5).
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 3 damage. If the target is wearing heavy armor, the armor is rusting until the end of
the encounter. While the armor is rusting, the target takes a -1 penalty to AC. If the target is
wearing armor that is already rusting, increase the penalty to AC by 1 (to a maximum penalty
of -5).
I Devour Metal • Recharge if the power misses
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature wearing or wielding a rusting item); +11 vs. Reflex
Hit: The rusting item is destroyed. If the item was magic, residuum worth the item's market value
can be retrieved from the rust monster after the creature is slain,
t Gluttonous Bite • Encounter
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 4d10 + 8 damage. If the target is wearing heavy armor, the armor is rusting until the end of
the encounter. While the armor is rusting, the target takes a -1 penalty to AC. If the target is
wearing armor that is already rusting, the penalty to AC worsens by 1 (to a maximum penalty
of -S). In addition, any weapon the target is wielding is rusting until the end of the encounter.
While the weapon is rusting, attacks with the weapon take a -1 penalty to attack rolls. If the
weapon is already rusting, the penalty to attack rolls worsens by 1 (to a maximum penalty of -5).
Miss: Half damage.
Str 16 (+7) Dex 16 (+7) Wls12(+S)
Con 20 (+9) Int 2 (+0) Cha 11 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
J ' l J 1 llaii.l«i> A /
Young Rust Monster S w a rm Level 9 Soldier
Medium natural beast (swarm) XP400
HP 92: Bloodied 46 Initiative +12
AC 25, Fortitude 19 Reflex 24. W i l l 19 Perception +5
Speed 6 Low-light vision
Resist half damage from melee and ranged attacks;
Vulnerable 10 to close and area attacks
TRAITS
0 Swarm Attack • Aura 1
Any enemy that ends its turn in the aura takes 5 damage. If the enemy has a rusting item, it is
also slowed until the end of its turn.
Rusting Defense
Whenever an attack using a metal weapon hits the rust monster, the weapon used in the attack
is rusting until the end of the encounter. While the weapon is rusting, attacks with the weapon
take a -1 penalty to attack rolls. If the weapon used to attack the rust monster is already rusting,
the penalty to attack rolls worsens by 1 (to a maximum penalty of -5).
Swarm
The swarm can occupy the same space as another creature, and an enemy can enter its space,
which is difficult terrain. The swarm cannot be pulled, pushed, or slid by melee or ranged
attacks. It can squeeze through any opening that is large enough for at least one of the creatures
it comprises.
STANDARD ACTIONS
j Swarm of Teeth • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d8 + 4 damage. If the target is wearing heavy armor, the armor is rusting until the end of
the encounter. While the armor is rusting, the target takes a -1 penalty to AC. If the target is
wearing armor that is already rusting, the penalty to AC worsens by 1 (to a maximum penalty
of-5).
Str 8 (+3) Dex 22 (+10) Wis 13 (+5)
Con 12 (+5) Int 2 (+0) Cha 12 (+5)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
"The problem with fighting a rust monster is that every
time you think you have an opening and swing your
sword, it raises its feelers eagerly, like you're handing it
a snack."
—Tennaris of Silver Spire
UIISI Ml INJS. I I U tf d) .I
SKELETON
Necromancy grants violent motion to these fles hless bones, letting them defy death and
deliver it to others.
It is said that the history of a life is written in bone. The fall from a tree in youth,
the kick of a horse in middle age, a trip upon the stairs in the late years of lifeall
make their marks upon bone. These scars are whispers of the past that echo
quietly after death. Few parts of a person's life speak when all that remains is a
barren skeleton. No memory or dream lingers in the empty shell of a skull. No
hint of the joy or sorrow can be seen upon the grimacing teeth. For a few skeletons.
though, death
doesn't mean decay and
ruin. These wordless
forms might not speak,
but their actions bear
a clear message: They
come to deliver death.
Symbol of Death:
Even inanimate skeletons
have the power
to inspire fear. Bones
are important pieces
of life. They are an
unseen part of the body
that supports and sustains
life. When bones
appear, they are associated
with death.
An animate skeleton
provokes greater
fear than ordinary
bones can. These
undead are twisted
mockeries that lack
everything that makes
life worthwhilesentience,
emotion,
pleasure. The walking
dead know only how
to obey.
Decrepit Skeleton Level 1 Minion Skirmisher
Medium natural animate (undead) XP 25 M HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +5
AC 16. Fortitude 13. Reflex 14. Will 13 Perception +2
Speed 6 Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic; Vulnerable 5 radiant
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Longsword (weapon) • At Will
Effect: The skeleton can shift 1 square before the attack.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 4 damage.
® Shortbow (weapon) • At Will
Effect: The skeleton can shift 1 square before the attack.
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 3 damage.
Str 15 (+2) Dex 17 (+3) Wis 14 (+2)
Con 13 (+1) Int 3 (-4) Cha 3 (-4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Equipment longsword, shortbow, 20 arrows
Blazing Skeleton
Medium natural animate (undead)
Level S Artillery
XP 200
HP 53; Bloodied 26 Initiative +6
AC 19. Fortitude 15. Reflex 18. Will 16 Perception +4
Speed 6 Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 fire, 10 necrotic;
Vulnerable 5 radiant w TRAITS
O Fiery Aura (fire) • Aura 1
Any creature that ends its turn in the aura takes 5 fire damage.
| STANDARD ACTIONS
© Blazing Claw (fire) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 3 damage, and ongoing 5 fire damage (save ends).
® Flame Orb (fire) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +10 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d4 + 4 damage, and ongoing 5 fire damage (save ends).
Str 13 (+3) Dex 18 (+6) Wis 15 (+4)
Con 17 (+5) Int 4 (-1) Cha 6 (+0)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
"Nothing holds them together but magic, a necromantic
binding that knits bone with scraps of soul and the
merest hint of will."
—Kalarel, scion of Orcus
Mindless Horrors: A skeleton has no desires, passions, or goals. It knows
neither good or evil. A skeleton's creation is considered a vile act, though, for it
requires disturbing a creature's bones in the most profane way. A skeleton raised
into undcath moves through the power of a soul's discarded animus; it is a primal
force that binds the soul and body to make life possible. Without an animus, a
skeleton cannot exist.
A skeleton might bear scars from its former life-a broken rib, a cracked femur,
a missing hand. Some skeletons don the artifacts with which they were laid to
rest out of an echo of memory or a vestige of habit. To an onlooker, these relics
might be striking or horrifying. To a skeleton, though, the objects are meaningless
like everything else in the world.
Driven by Another's Will: A skeleton does not want anything: a person
or force is always responsible for a skeleton's actions. Many powers can cause a
skeleton to rise from the grave: holy power, necrotic energy, a dark ritual, a necromantic
spell or hex, a curse from the lips of a dying person. A skeleton that is
animated and given little direction might wait in torpor for centuries, collecting
moss or gradually growing brittle. A skeleton set to turn the winch of a bridge
might crank it long after the bridge has fallen into disrepair. A skeleton commanded
to slay all it encounters might wander a forest for decades. A group of
skeletons set to guard a dwarven tomb might lack the wherewithal to distinguish
between a dwarven descendant seeking an ancestral weapon and thieves seeking
plunder. When a creature comes along to disturb a skeleton, the undead acts
according to the exact instructions of its master or animate force, sometimes even
blindly contradicting the true intent ofthe orders.
Deadly Servants: Skeletons are usually (bund in the service of one who
requires faultless followers or remorseless killers. A spellcaster might employ
skeletons for manual labor and menial tasks, but more often than not, they arc
used in battle or as guardians. Many continue to follow their Pinal orders even
after a master dies, though some skeletons have also been known to go berserk,
behave erratically, or collapse into piles of bones after a master's death.
Skeletons do not always serve spellcasters; they might have various functions
in a society. A noble family might ride through a city in a carriage drawn by skeletal
horses, reveling in the fright of onlookers. A pirate captain could employ a
skeleton crew so that none ofthe booty need be shared. Or. a group of assassins
might command skeletons to kill a person publicly while the group's members
remain safely in the shadows.
Skeletal Legionary Level 7 Minion Soldier
Medium natural animate (undead) XP 75
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion.
AC 23. Fortitude 20. Reflex 20. Will 18
Speed 5
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +9
Perception +5
Darkvision
'f ' //
© Longsword (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 7 damage.
Effect: The legionary marks the target until the end of the legionary's next turn,
©javelin (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 7 damage.
Effect: The legionary marks the target until the end of the legionary's next turn.
Str 18 (+7) Dex 19 (+7) Wis 14 (+5)
Con 16 (+6) Int 3 (-1) Cha 3(-1)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Equipment scale armor, heavy shield, longsword, 3 javelins
Skeletal Tomb Guardian
Medium natural animate (undead)
Level 10 Brute
XP 500
HP 126; Bloodied 63 Initiative+10
AC 23. Fortitude 22. Reflex 23. Will 20 Perception +12
Speed 8 Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic: Vulnerable 5 radiant
STANDARD ACTIONS
//7T >
! R 1
© Twin Scimitars (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +15 vs. AC. The guardian makes the attack twice against the
same target.
Hit: 1d8 + 2 damage, or 1d8 + 10 if the guardian scores a critical hit.
+ Cascade of Steel • At Will
Effect: The guardian uses twin scimitars twice.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Sudden Strike • At Will
Trigger: An enemy adjacent to the guardian shifts.
Effect (Immediate Interrupt): The guardian uses twin scimitars against the triggering enemy.
Str 18 (+9) Dex 20 (+10) Wis 14 (+7)
Con 16 (+8) Int 3 (+1) Cha 3 (+1)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Equipment 4 scimitars
STIRGE
Size is no concern/or stirpes. Swarms of these flying menaces can drain a large creature
of blood in minutes. In their wake, stirges leave withered bags of skin and bones-food for
any scavengers that dare to approach.
Few can forget the dreadful
drone of stirge wings; the
distinct sound of their dual
wings flapping in time
joins a cacophony of
other stirge wings, creating
a buzz that drowns
out all other noises. With
elements of lizard, bat,
crab, and mosquito,
a stirge might be
comical if not for
its feeding habits. A
stirge hovers on four
membranous wings,
which support the
creature as it searches for
warm-blooded quarry. When
a stirge spots prey, it flies up
close and clamps onto the creature
with four clawed limbs. The stirge
then plunges its pointed proboscis into
the victim's body, draining the victim of
blood. When the creature has had its fill, it
lifts its bloated body aloft and seeks a safe place to digest.
Hunters in Darkness: Like bats, stirges dwell in darkness. Caves, dungeons,
hollow trees, cellars, sewers, and crypts make excellent places for stirges to sleep.
Possessed of preternatural sight, stirges hunt in the darkest hours and the blackest
places. On the surface of the world, a stirge swarm is a nocturnal threat, but
in the confines of caves, there is no escape.
Widespread Threat: Stirges prefer to feast on creatures of halfling to horse
size, so they live wherever people or herd animals dwell. They are a constant
threat to humanoids, and each race has a strategy for dealing with the pests.
The creatures sometimes hide in ships or caravans like rats, so merchants have
developed repellents that are unpleasant to the creatures. Swarms of stirges
menace halfling boat villages as they pass through swamps and down rivers, so
halflings erect great nets and wicker lattices to protect them. Stirges also dwell
in the sewers of human cities. They boil up at night, requiring residents to secure
their doors and shutters as if as a hurricane were coming through. Fives resort
Stirge Level 1 Lurker
Small natural beast XP 100
HP 22; Bloodied 11 Initiative +7 ]
AC 15, Fortitude 12. Reflex 15, Will 12 Perception + 0 \
Speed 2, fly 6 Darkvision
TRAITS .
Nimble Bloodsucker
While the stirge has a creature grabbed, the stirge gains a +5 bonus to AC and Reflex.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At Will
Requirement: The stirge must not be grabbing a creature.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. AC.
Hit: 1d4 + S damage, and the stirge grabs the target (escape DC 12). Until the grab ends, the
target takes ongoing 5 damage.
Skills Stealth +8
Str 8 (-1) Dex 16 (+3) Wis 10 (+0)
Con 10 (+0) Int 1 (-5) Cha 4 (-3)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
"I always laugh when I hear some rube complaining about
the biting insects of the Witchlight Fens. You think those
bloodsuckers are bad?"
—Shara of Winterhaven
TRAITS
STANDARD ACTIONS
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion.
AC 19. Fortitude 16. Reflex 18. Will IS
Speed 2, fly 6
Initiative +9
Perception +7
Darkvision
Nimble Bloodsucker
While the stirge has a creature grabbed, the stirge gains a +2 bonus to AC and Reflex.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); -1-10 vs. AC. While the stirge has a creature grabbed, it can use
bite only against that creature, and it hits automatically.
Hit: 5 damage, and the stirge grabs the target (escape DC IS). Until the target is no longer
grabbed by any suckerlings, it takes damage at the start of its turn equal to the number of
stirge suckerlings grabbing it. The target takes this damage only once each turn, regardless of
how many suckerlings are grabbing it.
Skills Stealth +10
Str 7 (+0)
Con 12 (+3)
Alignment unaligned
Wis 10 (+2)
Cha 4 (-1)
to setting fire to trees in which stirges nest. Dwarves, on the other hand, send
out heavily armored extermination teams who cut the stirges to bits after hiring
them into a trap.
Other Stirge Threats: A stirge makes little distinction between horse or
human, bear or basilisk. Blood draws it like a moth to flame. A stirge is dangerous
for more than its lethal ability to drain blood, though. A survivor of a stirge
attack might contract a strange illness as a result of the diseased blood the stirge
transmits from another creature it has feasted upon.
Despite the dangers of stirges, some creatures value them for the very qualities
that make others fear them. Kobolds capture stirges to use them in clever
traps where cages containing stirges are dropped on foes. Practitioners of dark
magic capture stirges and train them to retrieve blood for foul rituals. Necromancers
trap stirges in the cavernous bodies of giant undead. When the
undead opens its maw, famished stirges come pouring out to attack the nearest
warm-blooded creature.
Death Husk Stirge
Small natural animate (undead)
Level 6 Skirmisher
XP2S0
HP 71: Bloodied 35 Initiative+9
AC 20. Fortitude 16. Reflex 20. Will 18 Perception >6
Speed 2, fly 6 Darkvision
Immune poison: Resist 10 necrotic
Necromantic Flyer
A death husk stirge that takes radiant damage cannot fly until the end of its next turn; if in the
air. it falls.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature);+11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage, and the death husk stirge recharges rotted blood.
Rotted Blood (necrotic) • Encounter
Attack: Close blast 3 (living creatures in the blast): -1-9 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 1d6 + 7 necrotic damage, and the target is blinded until the end of the stirges next turn.
Effect: Undead in the blast can shift 2 squares as a free action.
MOVE ACTIONS
Nimble Wing • At-Will
Effect: The death husk stirge flies 4 squares. This movement does not provoke opportunity
attacks.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<- Necrotic Miasma (necrotic) • At-Will
Trigger: The death husk stirge drops to 0 hit points.
Attack (No Action): Close burst 2 (living creatures in the burst); +9 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 5 necrotic damage, and the target is weakened until the end of its next turn.
Str 6 (+1) Dex 19 (+7) Wis16(+6)
Con 15 (+5) Int 4 (+0) Cha 7 (+1)
Alignment evil Languages -
S - 11.<1 \
Dire Stirge Level 7 Lurker
Small natural beast XP 300
HP 60; Bloodied 30 Initiative +10
AC 21. Fortitude 18. Reflex 20. Will 17 Perception +3
Speed 2, fly 6 Darkvision item TRAITS
Nimble Bloodsucker
While the stirge has a creature grabbed, the stirge gains a +2 bonus to AC and Reflex.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC. While the stirge has a creature grabbed, it can use
bite only against that creature, and it hits automatically.
Hit: 1d6 damage, and the stirge grabs the target (escape DC 16). Until the grab ends, the target
takes ongoing 10 damage.
Skills Stealth +11
Str 10 (+3) Dex 16 (+6) Wis 10 (+3)
Con 12 (+4) Int 1 (-2) Cha 4 (+0)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Stirge Suckerling S w a rm
Medium natural beast (swarm)
Level 10 Brute
XP 500 7 1
HP 128; Bloodied 64 Initiative +9 I I I S W A R M )
AC 22. Fortitude 22. Reflex 22. Will 20 Perception +7 UV h
Speed 2, fly 6 Darkvision • E S s ^ s l
Resist half damage from melee and ranged attacks;
Vulnerable 5 to close and area attacks
0 Blood Frenzy • Aura 1
Any enemy that starts its turn in the aura takes ongoing S damage (save ends). If that enemy is
already taking untyped ongoing damage, that damage increases by S.
Swarm
The swarm can occupy the same space as another creature, and an enemy can enter its space,
which is difficult terrain. The swarm cannot be pulled, pushed, or slid by melee or ranged
attacks. It can squeeze through any opening that is large enough for at least one of the creatures
it comprises.
STANDARD ACTIONS
na Swarm of Suckerlings • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 1 damage, and ongoing 5 damage (save ends).
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Hungry Flight • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy moves away from the swarm.
Effect (Immediate Reaction): The swarm flies up to its fly speed to the triggering enemy's square
or a square adjacent to that enemy. This movement does not provoke opportunity attacks.
Skills Stealth +14
Str 10 (+5) Dex 19 (+9) Wis14(+7)
Con 18 (+9) Int 1 (+0) Cha 4 (+2)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
TIEFLING
Hellish power courses through the veins of tieflings-power they can use for great good, or
for terrible evil.
Ticflings have a dark reputation as a result of their sinister past and uncertain
future. They now live every day with the sins of their ancestors written across
their faces.
A Hellish History: Long ago. the human empire of Bael Turath stood on the
brink of chaos. To preserve the empire, its ruling class signed blood pacts with
devils. Their compacts transformed the empire and the humans' bodies. Eventually,
both infernal forces and the tieflings of Bael Turath would break their
bargain, and the result would leave the empire in ruins.
Making Bad Choices: Despite their appearance, tieflings have as much
freedom to set the course of their lives as humans do. Nonetheless, tieflings are
still a target of prejudice and suspicion. Many tieflings eventually grow tired of
fighting their reputation and choose to embrace it.
Tiefling Fury
Medium natural humanoid
HP 63: Bloodied 31
AC 21. Fortitude 18. Reflex 17. Will 18
Speed 6
Resist 10 fire
STANDARD ACTIONS
Level S Soldier
XP 200 /
Initiative +4
Perception +2
Low-light vision
© Longsword (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 8 damage.
Effect: The tiefling marks the target until the end of the target's next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
+ Tail Trip • At Will
Trigger. An enemy marked by the tiefling shifts.
Attack (Immediate Interrupt): Melee 1 (triggering enemy); +10 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target falls prone, and the tiefling uses long sword against it.
Defiant Curse • At Will
Trigger: An enemy hits the tiefling.
Effect (Free Action): Close burst 10 (triggering enemy in the burst). The tiefling marks the target
until the end of the target's next turn.
Skills Bluff+10. Stealth+7
Str 16 (+S) Dex 11 (+2) Wis 10 (+2)
Con I S (+4) Int 14 (+4) Cha 16 (+5)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment leather armor, longsword
V-
)i%) » ii«Mli«M t /
Tiefling Occultist
Medium natural humanoid
HP 87; Bloodied 43
AC 22. Fortitude 18. Reflex 20. Will 22
Speed 6
Resist 10 fire
STANDARD ACTIONS
0 Hell Rod (fire, implement) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d6 + 6 fire damage, and ongoing 5 fire damage (save ends)
-K- Soul Fire (fear. fire, implement, psychic) • At Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 10 (enemies in the burst); +11 vs. Reflex
Hit: Ongoing 10 fire damage (save ends). In addition, the first time the target willingly moves
closer to the tiefling before the end of its next turn, the target takes 10 psychic damage.
Miss: Ongoing 5 fire damage (save ends).
MOVE ACTIONS
^r Baleful Teleport (teleportation) • Recharge X i i
Effect: Before the attack, the tiefling teleports up to 10 squares.
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +11 vs. Will
Hit: The tiefling teleports the target 10 squares to the square it just left.
TRIGGEREO ACTIONS
^ Fiery Transposition (fire, teleportation) • Encounter
Trigger. An enemy hits the tiefling.
Effect (Immediate Interrupt): Close burst 3 (creatures in the burst). Each target takes S fire
damage, and then the tiefling and the triggering enemy teleport, swapping positions.
Skills Bluff+14. Stealth +9
Str 10 (+4) Dex 11 (+4) Wis 13 (+5)
Con 15 (+6) Int 17 (+7) Cha 20 (+9)
Alignment unaligned Languages Common
Equipment leather armor, rod
Level 8 Controller
XP 350
Initiative +4
Perception +5
Low-light vision
I II I I INI. I Ht t
(Left to right) tiefling
occultist, tiefling fury
TREANT
A few great trees of the forest harbor the hearts of mighty fey. These titanic treants violently
protect the wild, giving little regard to the consequences for civilized races.
Some parts of the forest
seem more alive. The
flowers grow bright even
in deep shadows. The
insects drone louder.
Wind sways the high
branches, causing
the constant rustle of
leaves. In these parts
of the forest dwell the
treants. living trees that
are always alert for the
enemies of nature.
Wild at Heart:
A treant meditates
through the
cycle of seasons,
often remaining
dormant for
decades or centuries
before awakening
when nature has need.
During these periods
of dormancy, a treants
roots entwine with a
network of plants, and its
branches serve as homes
for animals. While a
treant sleeps, it dreams
ofthe world around it,
remaining cognizant of
the happiness or sorrow
ofthe living things in
the forest.
The thoughts of a treant flow as swiftly as those of humanoids, and its emotions
run just as deep. A treant is passionate about the forest but cares little
for the lives of any who live beyond the forest. The death of a humanoid is to a
treant as the death of a tree is to a person. A whole city might erupt in flames,
but the treant spares thought only for the danger to the wilderness surrounding
the city.
TRAITS
Bramblewood Treant
Large fey magical beast (plant)
HP 108: Bloodied 54
AC 26. Fortitude 23. Reflex 20. Will 24
Speed 8 (forest walk)
Level 10 Soldier
XP 500
Initiative +9
Perception +11
Low-light vision I
0 Bramble Branches • Aura 2
Enemies treat squares within the aura as difficult terrain.
Wooden Body
Whenever the treant takes fire damage, it also takes ongoing 5 fire
damage (save ends).
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Slam • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 1d12 + 12 damage.
Effect: The treant marks the target until the end of the treant's next turn.
^ Throw Stone • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 7 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Entangling Branch • At Will
Trigger: An enemy within 2 squares of the treant moves.
Attack (Immediate Interrupt): Melee 2 (triggering enemy); +13 vs. Reflex
Hit: The treant grabs the target (escape DC 18).
Str 21 (+10) Dex 14 (+7) Wis 22 (+11)
Con 20 (+10) Int 14 (+7) Cha 12 (+6)
Alignment unaligned Languages Elven
Civilization's Enemies: A treant sees the wilderness much like humans
view their villages and towns; while people struggle to expand the light of civilization,
a treant works to halt its growth and sometimes even to expunge it. A
treant prefers nature in its purest and most untamed form, and many oppose
even natural changes to its state such as fire, storm, or flood.
Their staunch opposition to civilization puts treants at odds with many societies.
Unfortunately for their foes, treants are like nature's siege engines. A single
crushing blow from one of these titans of the forest can crumple a person's body.
Treants recognize their strength, and they expect little opposition once they have
turned their thoughts toward destruction. Only terrible fire or a great number of
foes can give pause to a group of treants.
Ally to Many, Friend to None: As a fey and a defender of the wild, a treant
might ally with elves, eladrin, dryads, and other nature-loving fey. The connection
between treants and elves or eladrin is related more to their mutually long
lives than to any sympathy between them. Although some elves and eladrin have
formed strong bonds with treants through decades of diplomacy, most regard
treants warily, knowing that the tree creatures regard their civilizations in the
same way they do other humanoid settlements.
A treant allies with any creature that respects its values and opposes its
enemies. A treant might guard the lair of an orc tribe, so long as that tribe
I Ul AN I f 2(l'»
focuses its destruction outside the wilderness. Dryads and other plant creatures
are treants' most frequent allies. A dryad and a treant share the same disposition
and feelings about the forest, and their close proximity often leads the creatures
to develop a symbiotic relationship. A follower of Melora can also find common
cause with treants, so the tree creatures are sometimes found acting as oracles or
leaders for Melora's druids or guarding locations sacred to the goddess.
A treants allies should be careful to avoid doing anything a treant might perceive
as betrayal. Like dryads, a treant is swift to anger and difficult to placate. It
holds grudges long after the grandchildren of the offender have come and gone.
A human who wrongs a treant might doom generations of unrelated humans to
death in that treant's forest. A treant's bark might grow to conceal its scars, but
fhp wtuvl hpnpalh flic H;irL n c v r r fnrortt.
© Slam • At Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +21 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10+13 damage.
-I;- Awaken Forest (zone) • At-Will
Attack: Area burst 3 within 10 (enemies in the burst); +21 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 9 damage.
Effect: The burst creates a zone of difficult terrain that lasts until the end of the encounter or
until the treant uses this power again.
Earthshaking Stomp • Recharge if the power misses every target
Attack: Close burst 2 (creatures in the burst); +19 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 6d6 + 7 damage, and the target falls prone.
Str 24 (+15) Dex 12 (+9) Wis 2 S (+15)
Con 22 (+14) Int 14 (+10) Cha 12 (+9)
Alignment unaligned Languages Elven
"For ten generations of your kind, you have not been
welcome in this wood. What makes you think I have
forgotten the wrong you have done?"
—Rallaferanishad, treant of the Wild Grove
Mii/iWnt A /
Treant Grove Guardian
Huge fey magical beast (plant)
Level 18 Brute
XP 2,000
\<\siie this ring to c
ff/ tifj f i, V¥f"' HP 212; Bloodied 106 Initiative +11
AC 30. Fortitude 31. Reflex 28. Will 31 Perception +15
Speed 8 (forest walk) Low-light vision
Wooden Body
Whenever the treant takes fire damage, it also takes
ongoing 5 fire damage (save ends).
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Sweeping Slam • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one or two creatures); +23 vs. AC
Hit: 3d12 + 8 damage, and the target falls prone.
I Stump Stomp • Encounter
Effect: The treant moves up to its speed and can move through enemies' spaces during the move.
Each time the treant enters an enemy's space for the first time during the move, it can use slam
against that enemy.
Str 25 (+16) Dex 14 (+11) Wis 23 (+15)
Con 22 (+15) Int 14 (+11) Cha 12 (+10)
Alignment unaligned Languages Elven
Blackroot Treant Level 19 Elite Soldier
Huge fey magical beast (plant, undead) XP 4,800
1
Initiative +13
Perception +13
Low-light vision
HP 368; Bloodied 184
AC 35. Fortitude 32. Reflex 29. Will 31
Speed 6 (forest walk)
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
O Killing Roots (healing, necrotic) • Aura 2
Any enemy that ends its turn in the aura takes 10 necrotic
damage. Any undead ally that ends its turn in the aura
regains 10 hit points.
Wooden Body
Whenever the treant takes fire damage, it also takes ongoing 5
fire damage (save ends).
S B
© Slam (necrotic) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 3 (one creature); +24 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 6 damage, and ongoing 10 necrotic damage (save ends).
Effect: The treant marks the target until the end of the treant's next turn.
4 Double Attack • At-Will
Effect: The treant uses slam twice.
MINOR ACTIONS
4 Entangling Roots • At-Will
Attack: Melee 4 (one creature); +22 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target falls prone. The target is restrained (save ends).
Str 27 (+17) Dex 14 (+11) Wis 18 (+13)
Con 24 (+16) Int 16 (+12) Cha 22 (+15)
Alignment evil Languages Elven
M I ANI
TROGLODYTE
Foul-smelling creatures that dwell in the shallow depths of the Underdark, troglodytes are
violent, primitive monsters that use force to take what they want.
Considered by many to be the most loathsome of all humanoids, troglodytes
are degenerate reptile folk whose subterranean homes are warrens of filth and
disease. Troglodytes are characterized by their foul stench and their primitive
ways. They possess enough intelligence to speak and make weapons, and
they are even more animalistic and barbaric than ores and gnolls. A troglodyte
is governed by instinct and primitive desires; it lacks the rational thought to
resolve disputes through diplomacy. The vile reptile creatures take advantage
of unwary travelers, eating the people and taking their valuables. Even a seasoned
warrior or explorer might run afoul of troglodytes. As a result of such
conflicts, a troglodyte lair becomes littered with trophies from kills, the value
of which troglodytes remain oblivious of.
Loathsome Primitives: A troglodyte tribe consists of about thirty
members. The creatures are xenophobic and war with other troglodyte tribes
to guard their territory. Sometimes a conflict between multiple troglodyte
warrens spills onto the
surface of the world
with deadly repercussions.
In these
cases, the troglodytes
might forget about
fighting each other
and instead turn
their attention to new
prey. The other races
of the Underdark
have concluded that
reasoning with troglodytes
is impossible,
so they enslave
the creatures and
force them to do
their bidding.
A troglodyte's
penchant for
wanton violence
makes it difficult
to control.
Slave masters must
remain vigilant
lest the troglodyte
HP 74; Bloodied 37
AC 22. Fortitude 20. Reflex 17. Will 18
Speed 5
Initiative +6
Perception +5
Darkvision
Troglodyte Stench • Aura 1
Living enemies take a -2 penalty to attack rolls while in the aura.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Greatclub (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 4d4 + 4 damage.
Effect: The troglodyte marks the target until the end of the troglodyte's next turn.
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d4 + 9 damage.
® javelin (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 4 damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
4 Bite • At Will (1/round)
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature granting combat advantage to the troglodyte); +9 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 3d6 + 4 damage. Until the end of the troglodyte's next turn, the target regains half the
normal hit points from healing effects.
Skills Athletics +12. Endurance +12
Str 18 (+7) Dex 12 (+4) Wis 1S (+S)
Con 18 (+7) Int 6 (+1) Cha 8 (+2)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Draconic
Equipment greatclub, 2 javelins
slaves turn against them or resort to killing each other. Drow and duergar
use troglodyte slaves as Fodder in hattlcs or as tools Tor devastating smaller
enemy settlements.
Servants of Torog: Troglodytes worship many dark entities, the most
prominent of which is Torog, the King that Crawls. Torog is the god of torture
and imprisonment, and he dwells in the deepest reaches of the Underdark.
The troglodytes' primitive religion calls for them to make sacrifices to Torog
in order to earn the god's favor. Because Torog feeds on agony and torture,
subjects of troglodyte sacrifices usually endure hours of torment before death
comes. Sacrifices are often conducted in the deepest chambers of a lair. These
rooms contain unhatchcd troglodyte eggs that await the blessing of the King
that Crawls. A troglodyte tribe rarely conducts a raid for the sole purpose of
collecting victims for sacrifice. When a tribe lacks for captives, though, a group
gathers to go to the surface to drag back the weakest and most vulnerable individuals
it can find.
I K I M , M M 11 rF "U t'J
Raiders from the Underdark: Food and other resources are frequently
scarce in the Underdark because of heavy competition between subterranean
races. These shortages drive troglodytes to launch raids on surface settlements.
These raids are swift and straightforward; troglodytes lack the capacity for trickery
or cunning plans. The most shrewdness a tribe exhibits is attacking outlying
farms and homes in order to draw out a settlement's defenders, which can then
be more easily slaughtered. Otherwise, a troglodyte raiding party distinguishes
only between strong settlements and weak settlements. A troglodyte tribe might
pillage a small, undefended village to revel in violence, but it will risk an attack
on a larger settlement only out of greed for plunder. Troglodytes rarely attack
towns or cities, because they tend to have more organized defenses. Occasionally
a group of troglodytes emerges into a city through a sewer or a cellar. This
advantage can lead troglodytes to launch nighttime raids even in well-fortified
locations. Troglodytes rarely take captives, and they don't leave them alive lor
long. Anyone taken back to a troglodyte warren is either devoured or sacrificed
to Torog within a matter of hours or days. A rescuer wishing to find a victim alive
must act quickly after a troglodyte raid.
Troglodyte Grunt Level 6 Minion Skirmisher
Medium natural humanoid (reptile) XP 63
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion.
AC 20. Fortitude 20. Reflex 18. Will 16
Speed S
Initiative +6
Perception + 5
Darkvision
Troglodyte Stench • Aura 1
Living enemies take a -2 penalty to attack rolls while in the aura.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Club (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. AC
Hit: 7 damage.
Effect: The troglodyte shifts up to 2 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Scatter • At-Will
Trigger: The troglodyte is targeted by a close or an area attack.
E/jfect (Immediate Interrupt): The troglodyte shifts up to 2 squares to a square outside the triggering
attack's area of effect.
Str 18 (+7) Dex 13 (+4) Wls14(+S)
Con 16 (+6) Int 4 (+0) Cha 9 (+2)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Draconic
Equipment club
"Once you get past the stench . . . well, little remains but a
brutal savage trying to gut you with a bone spear."
—Kalistros of Maelbrathyr
7 7 0 \ a / i
Troglodyte Thrasher
Medium natural humanoid (reptile)
HP 100: Bloodied SO
AC 19. Fortitude 21. Reflex 17. Will 19
SpeedS
Level 7 Brute
XP 300
Initiative +5
Perception +6
Darkvision \
Troglodyte Stench • Aura 1
Living enemies take a -2 penalty to attack rolls while in the aura.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 4d6 + 5 damage.
+ Tooth and Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one or two creatures); +12 vs. AC. If the troglodyte targets only one creature, it
can make this attack twice against that creature.
Hit: 2d6 + 2 damage. If this attack bloodies the target, the troglodyte uses claw against the
target.
Str 18 (+7) Dex 1S (+5) Wis 16 (+6)
Con 20 (+8) Int 4 (+0) Cha 11 (+3)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Draconic
Troglodyte Impaler
Medium natural humanoid (reptile)
HP 69: Bloodied 34
Level 7 A r t i l l e ry
XP 300
Initiative +5
AC 22. Fortitude 22, Reflex 19. Will 17
SpeedS
Perception +9 U
Darkvision M V
TRAITS
Troglodyte Stench • Aura 1
Living enemies take a -2 penalty to attack rolls while in the aura.
STANDARD ACTIONS
©Spear(weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage.
® javelin (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 5 damage,
^r Impaling Shot (weapon) • Recharge l j ] [X] [ij]
Requirement: The troglodyte must be wielding a javelin.
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 5 damage, and the target is restrained (save ends).
Skills Athletics +12. Endurance +13
Str 19 (+7) Dex 14 (+S) Wis 13 (+4)
Con 21 (+8) Int 7 (+1) Cha 9 (+2)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Draconic
Equipment spear, 6 javelins
I MOlilOllY I '271
TROLL
The ultimate survivors, trolls can regenerate mortal wounds and regrow lost limbs. They
are uglv, stupid creatures, always searching/or their next meal.
After securing a lair, a troll spends its days hunting and eating anything edible
that lives nearby. A troll is well suited for its lifestyle: Its long, strong arms are
perfect lor ripping off limbs, its jaws are massive enough to devour large hunks
of flesh and bone, and its personality is cruel enough to enjoy every second of
the process. Trolls know they have a reputation. People fear them, and trolls are
glad to satisfy expectations. A troll believes that a victim paralyzed with terror
tastes better, so it seeks out a weak-willed target long before it resorts to hunting a
brave foe.
Trolls are notoriously stupid. A smart troll can barely outwit a normal human.
Even a small child might be able to trick a troll. Of course, once a troll realizes
it has been fooled, it will find the culprit and rip the creature apart. Conversing
with a troll is an exercise in futility and frustration (and it requires a person to
convince the troll not to eat him or her at first sight). Aside from recalling preferences
in what it likes to eat, a troll can remember very little. At best, a troll might
be able to recite a couple of short songs or a few phrases as taunts, even if they
don't entirely make sense.
Troll Level 9 Brute >
Large natural humanoid XP 400 /
HP 120; Bloodied 60 Initiative +8 /M
AC 21. Fortitude 22. Reflex 18. Will 18 Perception +6 J / o
Speed 8 /
Regeneration
The troll regains 5 hit points whenever it starts its turn and has
at least 1 hit point. When the troll takes fire or acid damage, its
regeneration does not function on its next turn.
Troll Healing (healing)
Whenever an attack that doesn't deal acid or fire damage reduces the troll
to 0 hit points, the troll does not die and instead falls unconscious until the start
of its next turn, when it returns to life with I S hit points. If an attack hits the troll and deals any
acid or fire damage while the troll is unconscious, it does not return to life in this way.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature): +14 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 7 damage. If the attack bloodies the target, the troll uses daw against it again.
Str 2 2 (+10) Dex 18 (+8) Wis 14 (+6)
Con 20 (+9) Int S (+1) Cha 9 (+3)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common, Giant
2 7 2 I Montltrt .» /
B a t t l e Troll Level 12 Soldier
Large natural humanoid XP 700
HP 124; Bloodied 62 Initiative+12 i
AC 28. Fortitude 26. Reflex 24. Will 22 Perception +8 / ,
Speed 7 1
TRAITS 1|
f j r vcv f
R ^
Regeneration * ' * yL
The troll regains 5 hit points whenever it starts its turn and has
at least 1 hit point. When the troll takes fire or acid damage, its
regeneration does not function on its next turn.
Troll Healing (healing)
Whenever an attack that doesn't deal acid or fire damage reduces the troll
to 0 hit points, the troll does not die and instead falls unconscious until the start of its next turn,
when it returns to life with 15 hit points. If an attack hits the troll and deals any acid or fire
damage while the troll is unconscious, it does not return to life in this way.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Broadsword (weapon) • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature): +17 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 8 damage. If the attack bloodies the target, the troll uses broadsword against it again.
E/jfect: The troll marks the target until the end of the troll's next turn.
<- Sweeping Strike (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Close blast 2 (enemies in the blast); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + S damage, and the target falls prone.
Str 2 3 (+12) Dex 19 (+10) Wis 14 (+8)
Con 20 (+11) Int 6 (+4) Cha 10 (+6)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common, Giant
Equipment scale armor, broadsword
Slain by Fire or Acid: Troll flesh regrows at an alarming rate. Only burning
a troll with fire or acid can keep the creature down. Anyone familiar with trolls
carries a torch when traveling through their
lands. When rumors spread that a troll has
moved near a settlement, people sometimes
leave torches burning on stakes near their
doors. Most trolls aren't afraid of fire,
though, so the torches just inform a troll
that its soon-to-be victims are inside.
Lairs in the Wild: A troll lair is usually
a grimy cave or an abandoned building
overgrown with vegetation. Trolls prefer
cozy lairs, so they pile up leaves, bones, and
other filth to make beds. A troll cave can
sometimes be located by searching for vultures circling above its lair. Trolls that
are fearful of fire and acid might live on islands in foggy lakes, under bridges,
or in places where water is accessible. Because trolls are resilient, they can live
almost anywhere, from caves in the icy north of the Frostfell to abandoned dwellings
in murky swamps.
"I don't care about light.
The reason I always
carry a burning torch?
Trolls."
—Harbek of
Hammerfast
Bladerager Troll Level 12 Brute
Large natural humanoid XP 700
HP 1 S I ; Bloodied 75 Initiative+10 i
AC 24. Fortitude 26. Reflex 24. Will 23 Perception +9 I I
Speed 7 1
| TRAITS
Regeneration
The troll regains 5 hit points whenever it starts its turn and has
at least 1 hit point. When the troll takes fire or acid damage, its
regeneration does not function on its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 9 damage. If the attack bloodies the target, the troll regains the use of bladerager
rand.
I Bladerager Rend • Encounter
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 4d10 + 5 damage, and ongoing 10 damage (save ends).
Miss: Half damage, and ongoing 5 damage (save ends).
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
<- Death Burst
Trigger: The troll drops to 0 hit points.
Attack (No Action): Close burst 2 (creatures in the burst); +1S vs. Reflex
Hit: 4d6 + 7 damage.
Effect: The troll is destroyed.
Str 23 (+12) Dex 18 (+10) Wis 16 (+9)
Con 21 (+11) Int 3 (+2) Cha 8 (+5)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common, Giant
The Rank and File: Villains, tyrants, and criminals recruit trolls into their
gangs or armies, using the creatures for their muscle, toughness, and ability to
inspire fear. Trolls don't always follow orders, though, so they can be independable
thugs and soldiers. Until a battle starts, they're undisciplined and reckless.
Once a battle begins, a troll gleefully rips through foes, paying little heed to commands
or directions. A troll soldier is content to be paid with a little gold and a
lot of food, and it uses whatever gear it is provided with. Heavily armored battle
trolls are a mainstay of large armies that fight for evil causes.
Fodder for Experiments: Sinister spellcasters capture trolls in order to
tinker with their miraculous healing abilities. These experiments might be
aimed at perfecting eternal life, creating the perfect soldier, or fulfilling a sadistic
urge. As a result of these profane experiments, many varieties of trolls exist.
These creatures, warped in mind and body, fight under the command of the foul
spellcasters who spawned them. A bladerager troll, for example, is the result of
a ritual that attaches blades and armor plates permanently to the body of a troll.
The process typically drives the creature insane, making it even more violent and
deadly than a normal troll. When a bladerager troll dies and the magic binding
the blades and plates ends, shrapnel hurtles outward, skewering those who
managed to slay the creature.
S 1 Al.ifl , 1 , ' f ft .1 J
Ghost Troll Render Level 13 Brute
Large natural humanoid (undead) XP 800 JF
HP 161; Bloodied 80 Initiative +10
AC 25. Fortitude 27. Reflex 24. Will 23 Perception +14
Speed fl y 7 (hover); phasing I
Immune disease, poison
I TRAITS
Insubstantial
The ghost troll takes half damage from all attacks, except those
that deal force damage. When it takes acid, fire, or radiant damage,
it loses this trait until the start of its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Spirit Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +16 vs. Reflex
Hit: 3d10+ 10 damage.
4 Terror Strike (psychic) • Recharges if the power misses
Attack: Melee 2 (one bloodied creature); +16 vs. Will
Hit: 5d6 + 12 psychic damage, and the target is slowed (save ends).
First Failed Saving Throw: The target is knocked unconscious instead of slowed (save ends). If
the target takes damage, the effect also ends.
Str 24 (+13) Dex 18 (+10) Wis 16 (+9)
Con 21 (+11) Int S (+3) Cha 11 (+6)
Alignment < haotic evil Languages Giant
Fit,
UMBER HULK
Horrors from the deepest Underdark caverns, umber hulks burrow through the earth in
search of prey. When one bursts into a surface realm, its claws rend flesh and its gaze
sows chaos among its victims.
Umber hulks are deadly predators that lurk in the dark spaces of the world.
With their strange second set of eyes, they confuse, disorient, and madden,
leaving creatures defenseless against their claws, which are strong enough to rip
through stone.
Burrowing Beasts: An umber hulk uses its tough claws to cut through solid
stone. It steadily scoops away rock as easily as a humanoid might shovel snow. As
the creature swiftly digs, it hurls crumbling boulders behind it, creating tunnels
just large enough to allow its hardened body to pass through.
Burrowing takes a lot of energy, so an umber hulk must eat often to replenish
its strength. Although digging through solid stone is a loud and slow process, an
umber hulk usually has a purpose or direction in its travels. In most cases, the
creature burrows to create connections between existing tunnels. With its tremorsense,
an umber hulk might detect an open space in nearby bedrock and then
tunnel to discover what lies beyond.
Umber Hulk
Large natural magical beast
Level 12 Elite Soldier
XP 1.400 ft
HP 248; Bloodied 124 Initiative +11
AC 28. Fortitude 25, Reflex 23. Will 22 Perception +13
Speed 5, burrow 2 (tunneling) Darkvision. tremorsense 5
Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1
STANDARD ACTIONS
oldier
' 1.400 . / / *
\Wi t4' it , h © Claw • At-Will
Requirement: The umber hulk must not have a creature grabbed.
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 10 damage.
4 Double Attack • At-Will
Effect: The umber hulk uses claw twice. If both attacks hit the same target, the umber hulk grabs
the target (escape DC 20).
4 Rending Claws • At-Will
Effect: Melee 2 (one creature grabbed by the umber hulk). The target takes 40 damage.
MINOR ACTIONS
<- Confusing Gaze • At-Will (1/round)
Attack: Close blast 5 (creatures in the blast); +15 vs. Will
Hit: The umber hulk slides the target up to 5 squares, and the target is dazed until the end of the
umber hulk's next turn.
Str 26 (+14) Dex 16 (+9) Wis 14 (+8)
Con 20 (+11) Int 5 (+3) Cha 11 (+6)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
2 / 0 1 M M I I I V I ,1 /
Creators of
Subterranean Passages:
Through
their tunnels, umber
hulks string together
caverns and dungeons
into local networks of
caves. While a purple
worm might create a
great highway between
the grand caverns of
the Underdark, umber
hulks make the back
streets and alleys.
The tunnels that
an umber hulk
creates are large
enough for a creature
smaller than it
to walk comfortably,
but creatures of
equal si/.e must
squeeze, and
creatures
larger than
the umber
hulk cannot
Pit at all. Drow, duergar, and illithids use trained umber hulks to dig tunnels
for them, although they must employ slaves to expand the tunnels to a more
comfortable size.
Although an umber hulk leaves behind a passage when it burrows, the tunnel
is not necessarily safe or easy to traverse. Debris sometimes chokes the path. An
umber hulk has little need to clear or stabilize the tunnel, after all, since it can
simply dig itself out.
"Two big bug eyes, two little eyes that can almost make
you think there's a brain behind those huge mandibles—
it's confusing just to look at the thing. Never mind
whatever magic lets it dig into your mind like its claws
dig through rock."
—Elior of Harkenwold
Umber Hulk Tunneler Level 15 Skirmisher A
A
Large natural magical beast XP 1,200
HP 148: Bloodied 74 Initiative +13
AC 29. Fortitude 28, Reflex 26. Will 25 Perception +15
Speed 5, burrow 2 (tunneling) Darkvision, tremorsense
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature): +20 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 7 damage.
4 Snatch and Run • At-Will
Effect: The umber hulk uses claw twice against the same target. If at
least one of the attacks hits, the umber hulk shifts up to 5 squares, pulling
the target with it to a square adjacent to it.
MINOR ACTIONS
<- Rebuffing Gaze (psychic) • At-Will (1/round)
Attack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +18 vs. Will
Hit: Until the end of the target's next turn, it takes 2d6 psychic damage whenever it enters a
square closer to the umber hulk.
Str 22 (+13) Dex 18 (+11) Wis 16 (+10)
Con 20 (+12) Int 5 (+4) Cha 11 (+7)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Umber Hulk Bewilderer
Large natural magical beast
Level I S Controller
XP 1,200 i
HP 148: Bloodied 74 Initiative +11
AC 29. Fortitude 28. Reflex 26. Will 25 Perception +15
Speed 5, burrow 2 (tunneling) Darkvision, tremorsense
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature): +20 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 6 damage, or 2d8 + 12 against a stunned or dazed target
<• Stunning Gaze • Recharge X] 11
Attack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +18 vs. Will
Hit: The target is stunned until the end of the umber hulk's next turn.
MINOR ACTIONS
<- Staggering Gaze (psychic) • At-Will (1/round)
Attack: Close blast 5 (enemies in the blast); +18 vs. Will
Hit: 1d10 + 5 psychic damage, and the umber hulk slides the target up to 5 squares.
Str 22 (+13) Dex 18 (+11) Wis 16 (+10)
Con 20 (+12) Int 5 (+4) Cha 11 (+7)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Ambushers Through Stone: Umber hulks are on a constant search for prey
or carrion. Gifted with neither stealth or speed, an umber hulk uses its tremorsense
to ambush prey. The monster first finds a road or well-trod passage and
then digs a tunnel that comes to within a few feet of the opening. When the
umber hulk detects movement through the wall or floor, it bursts through the
remaining stone and attacks. By the time a surprised creature reacts, it often
finds its body gripped in the monster's enormous claws.
Wild umber hulks do not distinguish between natural stone and that of buildings.
They are just as likely to explode into a dungeon chamber as to appear out
of the darkness of a cave. Umber hulk incursions into dwarven settlements and
the sewers of human cities present a dire threat to those communities.
Unnerving Eyes: An umber hulk possesses two pairs of eyes: a set of small,
black ones and a set of large, faceted ones. The large eyes are the source of an
umber hulk's dangerous gaze. Depending on the variety of an umber hulk,
its gaze might confound a foe, drive an enemy to attack its allies, or assault a
creature's psyche. The magical power of an umber hulk's eyes cuts away at a
creature's sanity as easily as the monster's claws sever flesh.
Deep Hulk
Large natural magical beast
Level 17 Elite Brute
XP 3.200 ,/
HP 404: Bloodied 202 Initiative +12
AC 29. Fortitude 30. Reflex 28. Will 27 Perception +16
Speed 5, burrow 2 (tunneling) Darkvision, tremorsense 5
Saving Throws +2: Action Points 1
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At Will
Requirement: The deep hulk must not have a creature grabbed.
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +22 vs. AC
Hit: 4d8 + 12 damage.
+ Double Attack • At Will
Effect: The deep hulk uses claw twice. If both attacks hit the same target, the deep hulk grabs
the target (escape DC 23).
4 Rending Claws • At-Will
Effect: Melee 2 (one creature grabbed by the deep hulk). The target takes 60 damage.
<- Maddening Gaze (charm) • At-Will
Attack: Close blast S (enemies in the blast); +20 vs. Will
Hit: During its next turn, the target takes a standard action to make a basic attack against its
nearest ally. If no ally is within range, the target instead takes a standard action to charge its
nearest ally it is able to charge.
Str 26 (+16) Dex 18 (+12) Wis 16 (+11)
Con 22 (+14) Int S (+5) Cha 11 (+8)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
VAMPIRE
Awakened to an endless night, a vampire lusts for the life it lost and sates that hunger by
drinking the blood of the living. In their dark and decadent dreams, they live in luxury,
ruling over kingdoms of mortals who exist to satisfy their most sinister appetites.
Kings and queens of undeath. vampires rule the night. Some are fiends driven
only by their lust for blood. These simple spawn are easily dispatched by those
with skill. Other vampires are true lords of darkness, mighty creatures that have
achieved a semblance of immortality
and have come to control legions of
vampires and other undead.
"There's something so
pure about a vampire's
evil, so perfect in its
utter corruption. ..
Cloaked in Superstition:
Vampires are
the subject of many
superstitions. Garlic
and holy symbols
are supposed to
repel them. Tales
say they cannot
cross running
water or pass the
threshold of a
house uninvited.
Vampires might
even be the source
of such falsehoods,
though it's likely that fear
of the creatures propagates
the rumors. Ultimately, few things
can protect a person from a vampire
other than a sturdy weapon or a powerful
implement.
I
Elder Vampire S p a w n Level 10 Minion Soldier
Medium natural humanoid (undead) XP 125
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +11
AC 26. Fortitude 23. Reflex 22. W i l l 20 Perception +12
Speed 7. climb 4 (spider climb) Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic CI
Destroyed by Sunlight
Whenever the vampire starts its turn in direct sunlight, it can take only a single move action
during its turn. If it ends that turn in direct sunlight, it turns to ash and is destroyed.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 8 damage, and the vampire grabs the target (escape DC 18) if it does not have a creature
grabbed.
\ Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the vampire); +15 vs. AC. If the target is dazed, the
attack hits automatically.
Hit: 10 damage, and the target is dazed until the grab ends.
Str 21 (+10) Dex 19 (+9) Wis 15 (+7)
Con 18 (+9) Int 9 (+4) Cha 12 (+6)
Alignment evil Languages Common
Only a couple of the superstitions about vampires are true: Vampires abhor
sunlight, and they cast no shadows or reflections. Not surprisingly, any vampire
that wishes to move unnoticed among the living tends to remain in poorly lit
areas where mirrors and other reflective surfaces arc absent.
Born from Death: Anyone who survives
an attack from a vampire might fall
prey to the vampire's curse, entering into a
deep, deathlike sleep. A person under this
curse is often assumed dead and ushered
through funeral rites. When that person
awakes at the next sunset, he or she is a
vampire. If confined within a coffin, this
vampire might already be buried or could
be awaiting burial in a temple or a family
member's home. Most vampires awaken as
slavering spawn, but a few retain enough
of themselves to emerge from death as
true vampires.
Although a vampire might retain memories of its life, most of the emotional
attachments are gone, replaced by the insatiable hunger for warm blood. Only
the strongest bonds remain, and often they are negative emotions, such as hate
or desire for revenge. Once-pure feelings become twisted by undeath: Love transforms
into hungry obsession, and friendship becomes bitter jealousy.
. . It'll tear at your
throat like a ravenous
beast, then smile at
your companions as it
dabs its blood-soaked
lips with a silk napkin."
—Terevan of
Celduilon
Vampire Night W i t ch
Medium natural humanoid (undead)
Level 10 Controller
XP soo
HP 98: Bloodied 49 Initiative +9
AC 24. Fortitude 20. Reflex 22. Will 24 Perception +12
Speed 7, climb 4 (spider climb) Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic; Vulnerable 5 radiant w
Burned by Sunlight (radiant)
Whenever the vampire starts its turn in direct sunlight, it takes 5 radiant damage.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 4d6 + 4 damage.
Effect: The vampire slides the target up to 3 squares.
4 Bite (healing) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one dazed, dominated, stunned, or unconscious creature); +15 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 10 damage, and the vampire regains 15 hit points.
Dream Lure (charm, psychic) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +13 vs. Will
Hit: 3d6 + 4 psychic damage, and the target is dazed until the end of its next turn.
Effect: The vampire pulls the target up to 3 squares.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Vanish into Shadow (illusion) • Encounter
Trigger: The vampire takes damage while bloodied.
Effect (No Action): The vampire becomes invisible until the end of the encounter or until it attacks.
Skills Acrobatics +14. Athletics +13. Bluff +16, Insight +12, Stealth +14
Str 17 (+8) Dex 18 (+9) Wis 15 (+7)
Con 10 (+5) Int 12 (+6) Cha 22 (+11)
Alignment evil Languages Common
Some sages whisper of rituals that can stop the transformation and awaken
a person under the vampire's curse. If the transformation cannot be stopped
in this way. then the only way to stop a person from becoming a vampire is
to burn or dismember the body. This puts a vampire hunter in the awkward
position of slaying a helpless innocent to prevent him or her from becoming a
vile creature.
Chained to the Grave: Every vampire remains bound to its coffin, crypt, or
grave site, requiring that the vampire rest there every day. Unlike most living
humanoids, though, vampires must rest during daylight hours. If a vampire did
not receive a formal burial, it must lie under a foot or so of earth at the place of its
transition to undcath (a cave or a dungeon chamber beneath the earth also suffices).
A vampire can move its place of burial or set up multiple places of burial by
transporting a significant amount of grave dirt or a large coffin pieces to another
location, where a similar resting place can be crafted.
i n ) t
Master Vampire Level 12 Lurker f
Medium natural humanoid (undead) XP 700
HP 98; Bloodied 49 Initiative <1S
AC 26. Fortitude 25. Reflex 24. Will 24 Perception +14
Speed 7, climb 4 (spider climb) Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic
Burned by Sunlight (radiant)
Whenever the vampire starts its turn in direct sunlight, it takes 10 radiant damage.
Regeneration
The vampire regains 10 hit points whenever it starts its turn and has at least 1 hit point. When
the vampire takes radiant damage, its regeneration does not function on its next turn.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 3d6 + 5 damage.
4 Bite (healing) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one dazed, dominated, stunned, or unconscious creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 4d10 + 10 damage, and the vampire regains 20 hit points.
Cloud of Bats (polymorph) • At-Will
Effect: The vampire assumes the form of a cloud of bats until the start of its next turn. While in
this form, the vampire cannot attack but becomes insubstantial, gains fly 8 (hover), gains a +5
power bonus to Stealth checks, and can move through enemies' spaces,
^r Dominating Gaze (charm) • Recharge when no creature is dominated by this power
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +17 vs. Will
Hit: The target is dominated until the end of the vampire's next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Mist Form (polymorph) • Encounter
Trigger: The vampire takes damage while bloodied.
Effect (No Action): The vampire becomes insubstantial and gains fly 12. The vampire cannot attack
or use cloud of bats. This effect lasts for 1 hour or until the vampire ends it as a minor action.
Skills Acrobatics +16. Athletics +17, Bluff +16, Insight +14, Stealth +16
Str 22 (+12) Dex 20 (+11) Wis 17 (+9)
Con 20 (+11) Int 15 (+8) Cha 21 (+11)
Alignment evil Languages Common
A vampire that fails to find rest each day struggles to maintain its strength
and sanity. As days without rest go by, a vampire goes mad with hunger for blood,
eventually coming to desire the blood of its former race above anything else. Its
feeding becomes a strange, externalized self-destruction. A vampire crazed by
such bloodlust cannot heal damage to its body until it rests.
VAMI'IKI F 7 HJ
WRAITH
Bereft of life and soul, the intangible wraith feels nothing except loss, hate, and wrath.
When a person dies and his or her spirit departs, the animus can remain,
clinging to a vestige of life. The animus can become a wraith, an insubstantial
creature that emerges amid the vanishing memories of a person's life; it becomes
trapped in an endless afterlife, tortured by remembered sensations and driven
mad by a hunger to reclaim the life it once had.
Life's Castaways: Life consists of three parts: body, spirit, and will. Without
will, the body ceases to function and the spirit leaves. Sages call the will the
animus, and they regard it as the shadow of the soul. When a body dies or a spirit
departs, sometimes the animus remains in the world. Without the spirit, though,
the animus has no purpose, and it runs amok. Like many undead, a wraith is the
result of an unfettered animus.
W r a i th
Medium shadow humanoid (undead)
HP 53: Bloodied 26
AC 19. Fortitude 17. Reflex 18. Will 15
Speed 0, fly 6 (hover): phasing
Immune disease, poison: Resist 10 necrotic
Level 5 Lurker
XP 200
Initiative +10
Perception +2
Darkvision
Insubstantial
The wraith takes half damage from all attacks, except those that deal force damage. Whenever
the wraith takes radiant damage, it loses this trait until the start of its next turn.
Spawn Wraith
When the wraith kills a humanoid, that humanoid becomes a wraith figment at the start of this
wraith's next turn. The new wraith appears in the space where the humanoid died or in the
nearest unoccupied square, and it rolls a new initiative check. The new wraith acts under the
Dungeon Master's control.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Shadow Touch (necrotic) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d6 + 6 necrotic damage, or 4d6 + 14 necrotic damage if the wraith was invisible to the
target when it attacked.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Shadow Glide (teleportation) • At-Will
Trigger. An attack that does not deal force or radiant damage hits the wraith.
Effect (Free Action): The wraith becomes invisible until it hits or misses with an attack or until the
end of the encounter. The wraith teleports up to 6 squares and cannot attack until the end of
its next turn.
Skills Stealth +11
Str 4 (-1) Dex 18 (+6) Wis 10 (+2)
Con 17 (+5) Int 6 (+0) Cha 15 (+4)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common
284 1 Mmi.lrr. \ /
When a wraith slays
a living humanoid.
another wraith emerges
from that person's body
within a few minutes, or
within a few seconds in
areas of intense necrotic
energy. Even when
powerful magic returns
a person to life, his or
her wraith remains. A
restored cadaver regains
its soul and heals fatal
wounds, but rather than
it regaining its former
animus, a new one
forms to close the gap
between body and spirit.
A wraith is consumed
by the blackest hate for
its twin, and it goes to
great lengths to murder
the person carrying the
new animus.
Bereft of Body:
Without the intermediary
of the body, wraiths experience the world as if through a veil of shadow.
Although everything has some weight and substance, nothing feels solid, and
everything is cold. Colors appear dim. and light is hazy. Nearby sounds seem to
come from a great distance away. A wraith can remember the taste and smell of
things, but it can no longer experience the physical sensations.
As intangible creatures, wraiths can move through solid objects as easily as a
corporeal creature might move through fog. A newly formed wraith might initially
avoid passing through walls or doors, recalling them to be solid. As these
memories fade, a wraith takes to using its power to pass through barriers in order
to find and kill living creatures out of a hunger lor the life it lost.
Haunted by the Past: Soulless undead. such as wraiths, retain memories of
their previous loves, passions, and interests, but these are dim echoes of the life
experiences. Even the strongest emotions from a wraith's life become little more
than faint feelings. A wraith might pause to stare at something that fascinated
it once, or it might curb its wrath in acknowledgment of a past friendship. Such
actions are rare, though. Instead, recognition of something from its past usually
provokes mindless fury. The wraith of a caring husband might, for example,
deliberately seek out its former wife to exact blind vengeance without ever comprehending
why it is angry.
Without a soul, a wraith lacks any true sense of honor, morality, or reason.
When it awakens and realizes that all it has lost is now beyond its grasp, a
madness sets in, and the wraith slays any around its body. This action does
nothing to abate a wraith's anger and usually incites the creature further. The
souls of the people a wraith slays rarely tarry, leaving a wraith more alone than
before and causing the creature only more anguish at its circumstance.
Many Hateful Forms: Although wraiths do not resemble their former
bodies, they still vary widely in form. Some wraiths are shreds of their former
selves, harrowing reminders of the horrors of death. Other wraiths gibber
insanely, driven mad by their inability to comprehend their situation. A wraith
might recall its ambition or leadership in life, acting as commander over a cadre
of wraiths. Regardless of its kind, though, a wraith rarely possesses the mental
faculties or the charisma to formulate long-term plots. Instead, a wraith is usually
content to haunt an area where it can exact revenge on the living, bowing only to
the might of powerful undead and necromancers.
Mad W r a i th
Medium shadow humanoid (undead)
Level 6 Controller
XP 250
HP 73: Bloodied 36 Initiative +8
AC 20. Fortitude 16. Reflex 19. W i l l 18 Perception -1
Speed 0, fly 6 (hover): phasing Darkvision
Immune disease, poison: Resist 10 necrotic n
0 Mad Whispers (psychic) • Aura 3
Any enemy that ends its turn in the aura takes 5 psychic damage, and the wraith slides it up to
2 squares.
Insubstantial
The wraith takes half damage from all attacks, except those that deal force damage. Whenever
the wraith takes radiant damage, it loses this trait until the start of its next turn.
Spawn Wraith
When the wraith kills a humanoid, that humanoid becomes a wraith figment at the start of this
wraith's next turn. The new wraith appears in the space where the humanoid died or in the
nearest unoccupied square, and it rolls a new initiative check. The new wraith acts under the
Dungeon Master's control.
STANDARD ACTIONS
©Touch of Madness (psychic) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature): +9 vs. Will
Hit: 2d6 + 7 psychic damage, and the target takes a -2 penalty to all defenses (save ends),
t Touch of Chaos (charm, psychic) • Recharge X; [l!
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. Will
Hit: 2d6 + 7 psychic damage, and the wraith slides the target up to 5 squares. The target must
then use a free action to make a basic attack against its nearest ally.
Miss: Half damage, and the wraith slides the target up to 2 squares.
Skills Stealth +13
Str 6 (+1) Dex 20 (+8) Wis 3 (-1)
Con 17 (+6) Int 11 (+3) Cha 19 (+7)
Alignment chaotic evil Languages Common
© Shadow Caress (necrotic) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. Reflex
Hit: 7 necrotic damage, and the target is slowed until the end of the wraith's next turn.
MOVE ACTIONS
Shadow Glide • Encounter
Effect: The wraith figment shifts up to 6 squares.
Skills Stealth +10
Str 3 (-2)
Con 13 (+3)
Alignment chaotic evil
Dex 17 (+5)
Int4(-1)
Languages —
Wis 10 (+2)
Cha 15 (+4)
Sovereign W r a i th Level 8 Soldier
Medium shadow humanoid (undead) XP 350 /
HP 89: Bloodied 44 Initiative +11
AC 24. Fortitude 20. Reflex 22, Will 21 Perception +6
Speed 0, fly 6 (hover); phasing Darkvision
Immune disease, poison; Resist 10 necrotic
Insubstantial
The wraith takes half damage from all attacks, except those that deal force damage. Whenever
the wraith takes radiant damage, it loses this trait until the start of its next turn.
Spawn Wraith
When the wraith kills a humanoid, that humanoid becomes a wraith figment at the start of this
wraith's next turn. The new wraith appears in the space where the humanoid died or in the
nearest unoccupied square, and it rolls a new initiative check. The new wraith acts under the
Dungeon Master's control.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Spectral Sword (necrotic) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +11 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d8 + 2 necrotic damage, and the target grants combat advantage and takes ongoing 5
necrotic damage (save ends both).
Effect: The wraith marks the target until the end of the wraith's next turn.
\ Lonely Death (illusion) • Recharge :: X I i
Effect: The wraith uses spectral sword. If the attack hits, all creatures except the wraith are invisible
to the target (save ends).
Skills Stealth +14
Str 15 (+6) Dex 20 (+9) Wis 15 (+6)
Con 17 (+7) Int 14 (+6) Cha 19 (+8)
Alignment evil Languages Common
WKAIIII f I H1
YUAN-TI
Whether they walk on two legs or slither on a scaled tail, the snake headed yuan-ti plot
dominion over all. Their sibilant whispers lurk behind many vile plots and dire calamities.
though few discover their machinations until it's too late.
Those who know of this sinister and secretive race of serpentine creatures rarely
speak their name above a whisper. The reptilian humanoids seem to come writhing
out of myth and bedtime stories. Although rarely seen, yuan-ti have been
ubiquitous for generations, their secret existence a nightmarish reality since the
end ofthe Dawn War.
(Left to right)yuan-ti malison sharp-eye, malison stalker, malison chanter
World Domination: When the gods were in the midst of creating the creatures
of the world. Zehir found he could not craft his own creature, so he decided
to steal one. He appealed to Avandra to teach him how to change the creations of
others. At first Avandra refused, but through his silver tongue, Zehir convinced
her. Despite being enamored of Zehir. Avandra did attach a condition to his
power of alteration: He could change a creature only with its creator's permission.
Zehir saw only one way to have his will: to kill humanity's creator so that no
one existed to deny him the permission he required.
After the Dawn War ended and the other gods had exhausted much of their
strength, Zehir remained strong and vigilant for his opportunity. When the
time came, he murdered the now-forgotten creator of humans and laid claim lo
J88 i Mini%lrr% A /
the race as his own. Under his powers of alteration, countless humans were
transformed into members of a serpentine race that became known as yuan-ti.
For a time, the other immortals could do nothing to halt the progress of these
creatures as they formed the great yuan-ti empire of Zannad. Eventually, when
the other gods had regained their strength,
they forced Zehir to relinquish control
of the human race. The gods squabbled
over who should have power over humanity,
and in the end. nothing was decided,
for the contest continues today. As a result,
humans have the potential to be both the
most corruptible and most devout of
any race.
During the time of the empire, yuan-ti
lorded over human servants and monstrous
slaves, living as royalty. Over time, those
who suffered under the yuan-ti united and
worked to divide and defeat their former masters. These rebellions led to the
first human empires and an end to Zannad. Since then, yuan-ti have schemed to
regain their former glory, and they have come close many times. Yuan-ti orchestrate
the actions of cultists of Zehir, subtly shifting events in their favor. In a few
places, such as the Zahnshahan, the Slithering City, yuan-ti rule openly as in
the days of old. For now, these serpentine city-states treat neighbors as friends
and allies, at least until the neighboring regions are sufficiently weakened by
yuan-ti plots.
"Perhaps we once were
human, as you say. But
what does it matter?
Zehir has made us so
much more."
—Vastrana,
yuan-ti malison
Yuan-ti Malison Stalker
Medium natural humanoid (reptile)
Level 13 Skirmisher
XP 800
HP 126: Bloodied 63
AC 27. Fortitude 24. Reflex 27. Will 25
Speed 7
Resist 10 poison
Initiative +14
Perception +13 m •
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Morningstar (poison, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage, and the target cannot mark enemies and takes ongoing S poison damage
(save ends both).
® Poisoned Dagger (poison, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 3d4 + 6 damage, and ongoing S poison damage (save ends).
Slither Strike •At-Will
Effect: The yuan-ti ends any marking effect on it and then shifts up to 4 squares. At any point
during the shift, the yuan-ti can use morningstar or poisoned dagger.
Skills Bluff +15. Insight +13. Stealth +17
Str 17 (+9) Dex 2 2 (+12) Wis 14 (+8)
Con 14 (+8) Int 19 (+10) Cha 19 (+10)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
Equipment morningstar, 5 daggers
YUAN II 7
Yuan-ti Malison Sharp-Eye
Medium natural humanoid (reptile)
Level 13 A r t i l l e ry
XP 800 P HP 98; Bloodied 49
AC 27. Fortitude 23. Reflex 26. Will 24
Speed 7
Resist 10 poison
Initiative+12
Perception +13 r
TRAITS
Chameleon Defense
The yuan-ti has partial concealment from creatures more than 3 squares away from it.
STANDARD ACTIONS
Level 14 Soldier
XP 1,000
MINOR ACTIONS
Yuan-ti Abomination
Large natural humanoid (reptile)
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Scimitar (weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. AC
Hit: 3d8 + 4 damage.
@ Longbow (poison, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +20 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 6 damage, and the yuan-ti makes a secondary attack against the target.
Secondary Attack: +18 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The target is dazed and takes ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends both).
Str 18 (+10) De* 23 (+12) Wis14(+8)
Con 14(+8) Int 12 (+7) Cha18(+10)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
Equipment scimitar, longbow, 20 arrows
© Bastard Sword (poison, weapon) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +19 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 4 damage, and the yuan-ti marks the target until the end
of the yuan ti's next turn. In addition, the target takes ongoing S poison
damage (save ends).
4 Bite (poison) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the yuan-ti); +17 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d12 + 6 poison damage, and ongoing 10 poison damage (save ends).
4 Grasping Coils • At Will (1/round)
Requirement: The yuan-ti must not have a creature grabbed.
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +17 vs. Reflex
Hit: The yuan-ti pulls the target 1 square and then grabs it (escape DC 21).
Str 22 (+13) Dex 18 (+11) Wis 16 (+10)
Con 20 (+12) Int 12 (+8) Cha 14 (+9)
Alignment evil Languages Draconic
Equipment bastard sword
HP 140; Bloodied 70
AC 30. Fortitude 28. Reflex 26. Will 25
Speed 7. climb 7
Resist 10 poison
Initiative +13
Perception +10
29OT MiiM«I|I» /
Poisonous Plots: Yuan-ti learn well from the lessons of past failures. They
are patient, hatching plots that extend for generations. They plan multiple contingencies,
so that when one avenue to power becomes blocked, another opens up.
Many people of good intention receive encouragement and rewards from yuan-ti
or those who serve yuan-ti. A yuan-ti tries to influence people not through force
or fear but through the promise of wealth, fame, or helping others. Yuan-ti direct
the actions of those who attract their interest, employing more subtlety than
mind flayers and more cunning than drow.
Vile Acts and Cruelty: As subtle and cunning as yuan-ti are, they sometimes
employ openly evil tactics. A cult of Zehir might infiltrate a city under the guise
of a beneficial organization or an elite secret society. Members of the cult, called
snaketongue cultists, might be of any humanoid race. They gain serpentine traits
and special powers in return for loyalty. Proving one's loyalty usually requires
a person to commit a heinous act, such as murder, kidnapping, enslavement, or
extortion. Members of the cult perform rituals that force a physical transformation
upon a victim. The snaketongue cultists convince a victim that he or she has
no option but to serve the yuan-ti, now that the individual is marked by Zehir.
Yuan-ti Malison Chanter
Medium natural humanoid (reptile)
HP 118: Bloodied 59
AC 29. Fortitude 25. Reflex 27. Will 28
Speed 7
Resist 10 poison
Level 15 A r t i l l e ry
XP 1,200
Initiative +13
Perception +13
Bloody Scales
While bloodied, the yuan-ti gains a +2 bonus to speed and a +2 bonus to all defenses.
STANDARD ACTIONS
® Bite (poison) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +18 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d6 + 6 damage, and ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends).
® Mind Warp (psychic) • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature); +20 vs. Will
Hit: 4d6 + 9 psychic damage, and the target takes a -2 penalty to attack rolls until the end ofthe
yuan-ti's next turn.
•Y Poisoned Domination (charm) • Recharge when first bloodied
Attack: Ranged 20 (one creature taking ongoing poison damage); +20 vs. Will
Hit: The target is dominated until the end of the yuan-ti's next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Deflect Attack • Recharge " ] (H ii
Trigger: A melee or a ranged attack hits the yuan-ti.
Effect (Immediate Interrupt): The triggering attack instead hits one of the yuan-ti's allies adjacent
to It.
Skills Bluff+19. Insight +18. Stealth +18
Str 16 (+10) Dex 2 2 (+13) Wis 2 2 (+13)
Con 22 (+13) Int 25 (+14) Cha 25 (+14)
Alignment evil Languages Common, Draconic
S II AM I I #7*1
ZOMBIE
These mindless, shambling corpses
murder anyone not swift enough to
get away.
From somewhere in the darkness
comes a thump and a scuffle. As
the noise comes again, drawing
closer, a gurgling moan can be
heard-the rattling wheeze of
rotten lungs pressing air out. A
form lurches into view,
dragging one foot as it
raises bloated arms
and broken hands
like a child seeking
an embrace. This
creature is a zombie,
and it blindly seeks to
crush life.
Many Hideous
Forms: Fueled
by dark magic,
malevolent forces,
dire curses, or
angry spirits,
zombies are animate
corpses. Any corpse
with flesh suffices
to make a
zombie. It might be
a dead warrior from a
battlefield, distended from days in
the sun, guts trailing from a mortal wound. It might be a muddy cadaver of a
woman recently buried and risen again, leaving maggots and worms in her
wake. A zombie could wash ashore or rise from a marsh, swollen and reeking
from weeks in the water. A zombie could instead appear alive, crafted from a
recently deceased corpse.
A zombie need not be the size of a normal humanoid, or even humanoid in
form. When a necromancer or a natural phenomenon causes a corpse to rise, the
corpse could belong to the smallest beast or the largest giant. When a zombie
plague infects a city, any size or kind of creature can be affected-horses, dogs,
children, cats-anything that has a pulse.
Grasping Zombie
Medium natural animate (undead)
Level 1 Brute
X P 100
HP 33: Bloodied 16 Initiative -1 i a AC 13. Fortitude 14. Reflex 11. Will 11
Speed 4
Immune disease, poison
Perception -1
Darkvision
TRAITS
Zombie Weakness
A critical hit automatically reduces the zombie to 0 hit points.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Slam • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d12 + 3 damage, or 1d12 + 8 against a grabbed target.
4 Zombie Grasp • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +4 vs. Reflex
Hit: The zombie grabs the target (escape DC 12) if it does not have a creature grabbed.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Deathless Hunger • Encounter
Trigger: The zombie is reduced to 0 hit points, but not by a critical hit.
Effect (No Action): Roll a d20. On a 15 or higher, the zombie is instead reduced to 1 hit point.
Str 16 (+3) Dex 8 (-1) Wis 8 (-1)
Con 13 (+1) Int 1 (-5) Cha 3 (-4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Shadows of Life: Zombies possess a semblance of life. Sludgelike blood
trickles through their veins, and cold, rank breath gusts from their lungs. And
yet death has rendered zombies immune to pain, disease, and poison. Although
their lungs spasm and stomachs
churn, they need not breathe, eat,
or sleep. Undcath has given them
the power to see in darkness-even
without eyes-and the necrotic
energy that fuels the creatures makes
them tireless.
Zombies do not require food, but
some are driven by a hunger for the
flesh of the living. These zombies
consume their victims while remaining
heedless of their struggles and
screams. A zombie feasts on a body
"Now zombies, they still
have flesh and sinew to
hold them in one piece,
more or less. It makes
them so much more .. .
persistent."
—Kalarel,
scion of Orcus
until another living meal comes along
or until the chill of death settles over a body. Some zombies hunger for a particular
part of the body, such as the heart or the brain, but such peculiar obsessions
arc usually the byproduct of a zombie's creator.
/< thiiin I I Q1
Soulless, Fearless, and Stupid: For a zombie to be animated, a body's soul
must have departed. What remains in the corpse is an animus, a vital spark that
drives the body without thought or conscience. Without a soid or memories, a
zombie has no more humanity or intelligence than a simple animal. As a result,
it also lacks a sense of self-preservation. Unless a zombie is properly commanded,
a zombie might beat at the door of a home while its residents escape out a nearby
window. Despite a zombie's stupidity, the creature remains a dangerous foe due
to its resilience. A zombie might step olf a ledge to reach a foe and in so doing
break its legs. Instead of ceasing its pursuit, though, the zombie will drag its
broken legs behind it as it claws toward its target. Another zombie might walk
right through a fire and become ignited in flames as it attacks a foe.
A Terrifying Plague: In most cases, a zombie serves its creator or rises in
response to the defilement of a sacred location. At rare times, zombies arise in
the hundreds. These zombie plagues are provoked by cosmic, magical, or divine
events. A zombie plague might be the result of an angry god, a magical experiment
gone wrong, a powerful ritual, or a falling star. When the event occurs, the
bodies of the dead claw out of their graves and attack the living. Anyone who dies
as a result of such an assault soon becomes a zombie after acquiring the disease
or curse that the zombies carry. These terrifying plagues can consume an entire
civilization if left unchecked.
Hulking Zombie Level 4 Brute
Large natural animate (undead) XP 175 /y
HP 70: Bloodied 3S
AC 16. Fortitude 18. Reflex 14. Will 14
Speed 4
Immune disease, poison
Initiative +1
Perception +1
Darkvision
Zombie Weakness
A critical hit automatically reduces the zombie to 0 hit points.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© S l am • At-Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature): +9 vs. AC
Hit: 2d12 + 2 damage, or 2d12 + 7 against a prone target or one that is grabbed by another
CWHW.
4 Zombie Rush • At-Will
Effect: The zombie charges and makes the following attack in place of a basic melee attack.
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +7 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d12 + 2 damage, and the zombie pushes the target 1 square and knocks it prone.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Deathless Hunger • Encounter
Trigger: The zombie is reduced to 0 hit points, but not by a critical hit.
Effect (No Action): Roll a d20. On a 15 or higher, the zombie is instead reduced to 1 hit point.
Str 20 (+7) Dex 8 (+1) Wis 8 (+1)
Con 20 (+7) Int 1 (-3) Cha 3 (-2)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
sHI/1- \
Flesh-Crazed Zombie
Medium natural animate (undead)
Level 4 Skirmisher
XP 175 HP 55; Bloodied 27
i i
AC 18. Fortitude 17. Reflex 16. Will 14
Speed 6 (8 when charging)
Immune disease, poison
Initiative +6
Perception +3
Darkvision u
Vil
Flesh-Crazed Charge
While the zombie is charging, its movement does not provoke opportunity attacks.
Zombie Weakness
A critical hit automatically reduces the zombie to 0 hit points.
STANDARD ACTIONS
©Club • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 6 damage, or 2d8 + 6 if the zombie charged the target.
\ Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 -•- S damage, and the target is dazed until the end of the zombie's next turn.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Deathless Hunger • Encounter
Trigger: The zombie is reduced to 0 hit points, but not by a critical hit.
Effect (No Action): Roll a d20. On a 15 or higher, the zombie is instead reduced to 1 hit point.
Str 18 (+6) Dex 1S (+4) Wis 13 (+3)
Con I S (+4) Int 1 (-3) Cha 3 (-2)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Equipment club
Zombie Shambler Level 5 Minion Brute
Medium natural animate (undead) XP SO
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion.
AC 17. Fortitude 18. Reflex 15, W i l l 15
Speed 4
Immune disease, poison
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Slam • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 8 damage.
Initiative +1
Perception +1
Darkvision
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
Deathless Hunger • Encounter
Trigger: The zombie is reduced to 0 hit points, but not by a critical hit.
Effect (No Action): Roll a d20. On a 1S or higher, the zombie is instead reduced to 1 hit point.
Str 18 (+6) Dex 8 (+1) Wis 8 (+1)
Con 15 (+4) Int 1 (-3) Cha 3 (-2)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
APPENDIX: ANIMALS
This appendix offers statistics for some common animals.
Bear
Bear Level S Brute
Large natural beast XP 200
HP 80; Bloodied 40
AC 17. Fortitude 19, Reflex 16. Will 16
Speed 8
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage.
4 Bear Grab • Recharge when first bloodied
Effect: The bear uses claw twice against the same target. If either attack hits, the target falls
prone, and the bear grabs the target (escape DC 15) if it has fewer than two creatures grabbed.
Str 20 (+7) Dex 13 (+3) Wis 13 (+3)
Con 20 (+7) Int 2 (-2) Cha 12 (+3)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Dire Bear Level 11 Elite B r u t e .
Large natural beast XP 1.200 Y;
HP 276; Bloodied 138 Initiative +8 t
AC 23. Fortitude 25. Reflex 22, Will 23 Perception +9 *
Speed 8 | Saving Throws +2; Action Points 1 •
STANDARD ACTIONS m
© Claw • At Will
Attack: Melee 2 (one creature); +16 vs. AC
Hit: 3d10 + 8 damage.
4 Maul • At Will
Effect: The bear uses claw twice. If both attacks hit the same target, the
bear grabs the target (escape DC 19) if it has fewer than two creatures grabbed.
4 Ursine Crush • At-Will
Effect: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the bear). The target takes 4d10 + 10 damage
Str 2 3 (+11) Dex 16 (+8) Wis 18 (+9)
Con 18 (+9) Int 2 (+1) Cha 16 (+8)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
"Some bears are pretty peaceful. They'll leave you alone if
you don't bother them. These aren't those bears."
—Farren Windhowler, ranger of the Harken Forest
196 1 tmi.ii.fo lium.ifs I III AW
Crocodile
Crocodile Level 3 Soldier J
Medium natural beast (reptile) XP 150 u
HP 46: Bloodied 23 Initiative +4 >[4
AC 19, Fortitude 16. Reflex 14. Will 15 Perception +3 V Speed 4, swim 8 Low-light vision
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At-Will
Requirement: The crocodile must not have a creature grabbed.
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +8 vs. AC
Hit: 1dl0 + 6 damage, and the crocodile grabs the target (escape DC 13).
+ Crushing Jaws • At-Will
Effect: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the crocodile). The target takes 2d8 + 3 damage.
Skills Stealth +7
Str 17 (+4) Dex 12 (+2) Wis 14 (+3)
Con 14 (+3) Int 1 (-4) Cha7(-1)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
TRAITS
Horse
Horse Level 1 Brute
Large natural beast (mount) XP 100 /A
HP 36: Bloodied 18 Initiative +1
AC 13. Fortitude 15. Reflex 13. Will 10 Perception +5
Speed 10 Low-light vision
Charger (mount)
The horse's rider gains a +3 bonus to damage rolls on charge
attacks.
B U B S
© Kick • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 4 damage,
t Trample • Encounter
Effect: The horse moves up to its speed and can move through enemies' spaces during the move.
Each time the horse enters an enemy's space for the first time during the move, it makes the
following attack against that enemy.
Attack: Melee 0; +4 vs. Reflex
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage, and the enemy falls prone.
Str 19 (+4) Dex 13 (+1) Wis 11 (+0)
Con 16 (+3) Int 2 (-4) Cha 9 (-1)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
"Sure, you'll strike terror into your enemies' hearts if you
ride a manticore or a dire wolf into battle. But a horse is
the most likely to carry you back off the battlefield."
—Oakley, knight of Therund
Hyena
War Hyena Level 8 Minion Soldier i
Medium natural beast XP 88 /
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +9
AC 24. Fortitude 21. Reflex 20. Will 19 Perception +6
Speed 8 Low-light vision
O Harrier • Aura 1
Any enemy in the aura grants combat advantage.
STANDARD ACTIONS
n s Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +13 vs. AC
Hit: 8 damage.
TRIGGERED ACTIONS
4 Savage Response • At-Will
Trigger: An enemy adjacent to the hyena makes an attack that doesn't include it as a target.
Str 20 (+9)
Con 16 (+7)
Dex 17 (+7)
Int 2 (+0)
Wis 15 (+6)
Cha 5 (+1)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
R a t __
Dire Rat
Small natural beast
Level 1 Brute
XP 100
HP 38: Bloodied 19
AC 13. Fortitude 13. Reflex 11. Will 9
Speed 6. climb 3
STANDARD ACTIONS
Initiative +2
Perception +5
Low-light vision
© Bite (disease) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 + 5 damage. At the end ofthe encounter, the target makes a saving throw. On a failure,
the target contracts dire rat filth fever (stage 1).
Skills Stealth +7
Str 14 (+2) Dex 1S (+2) Wis 10 (+0)
Con 18 (+4) Int 2 (-4) Cha 6 (-2)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Dire Rat Filth Fever Level 1 Disease
Those infected by this disease waste away as they alternately suffer chills and hot flashes.
Stage 0: The target recovers from the disease.
Stage 1: While affected by stage 1, the target loses a healing surge.
Stage 2: While affected by stage 2, the target loses a healing surge. The target also takes a -2 penalty
to AC, Fortitude, and Reflex.
Stage 3: While affected by stage 3, the target loses all healing surges and cannot regain hit points.
The target also takes a -2 penalty to AC, Fortitude, and Reflex.
Check: At the end of each extended rest, the target makes an Endurance check if it is at stage 1 or 2.
7 or Lower. The stage of the disease increases by 1.
8-11: No change.
12 or Higher The stage of the disease decreases by 1.
IQM 1 A. ..It. I i l v l U i
Scurrying Rat Swarm
Medium natural beast (swarm)
Level 1 Skirmisher
XP100
HP 27; Bloodied 13 Initiative +5
AC 15. Fortitude 13. Reflex 15. W i l l 11 Perception +4
Speed 6, climb 2 Low-light vision
Resist half damage from melee and ranged attacks;
Vulnerable 5 to close and area attacks
SWARM
0 Swarm Attack • Aura 1
Any enemy that ends its turn in the aura takes 4 damage, and the swarm can slide it 1 square as
a free action.
Swarm
The swarm can occupy the same space as another creature, and an enemy can enter its space,
which is difficult terrain. The swarm cannot be pulled, pushed, or slid by melee or ranged
attacks. It can squeeze through any opening that is large enough for at least one of the creatures
it comprises.
STANDARD ACTIONS
8 Swarm of Teeth • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. AC
Hit: 1d10 -I- 3 damage, or 1d10 + 8 if the swarm moved at least 2 squares during this turn.
Effect: The swarm can shift 1 square.
Str 12 (+1)
Con 11 (+0)
Dex 16 (+3)
Int 1 (-5)
Wis 9 (-1)
Cha 7 (-2)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Shark
Shark
Medium natural beast (aquatic)
Level 5 Brute
XP 200 W f t
HP 75: Bloodied 37
AC 17. Fortitude 18. Reflex 17. Will 17
Speed 1 (clumsy), swim 8
Initiative +4
Perception +4
Low-light vision V I J Y
TRAITS . — —' ^
Aquatic
The shark can breathe underwater. In aquatic combat, it gains a +2 bonus to attack rolls against
nonaquatic creatures.
Blood Frenzy
The shark gains a -1-2 bonus to attack rolls and a +4 bonus to damage rolls against bloodied
creatures.
STANDARD ACTIONS
H Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 7 damage.
Str 18 (+6) Dex 15 (+4)
Con 15 (+4) Int 1 (-3)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Wis 14 (+4)
Cha 8 (+1)
"Cold, unfeeling, and brutal. I don't care if you're talking
about the sea or the sharks that swim in it."
—Mardred of Hammerfast
Snake
Spitting Cobra Level S Minion Soldier w>
Small natural beast (reptile) XP 50 Wri
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +8
AC 21. Fortitude 17, Reflex 18. Will 17 Perception +4
Speed 6, climb 6 Low-light vision
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite (poison) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 6 poison damage, and the cobra marks the target until the end ofthe cobra's next turn.
® Blinding Spittle (poison) • Recharge fj](X)Ii]
Attack: Ranged S (one creature); +8 vs. Reflex
Hit: 6 poison damage, and the target is blinded (save ends).
Str 7 (+0) Dex 18 (+6) Wis 15 (+4)
Con 15 (+4) Int 1 (-3) Cha 10 (+2)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Deathrattle Viper
Medium natural beast (reptile)
HP 75: Bloodied 37
AC 17. Fortitude 16. Reflex 18. Will 16
Speed 4, climb 4
Level 5 Brute
XP 200
Initiative +6
Perception +7
Low-light vision
STANDARD ACTIONS
Crushgrip Constrictor
Large natural beast (reptile)
Level 9 Soldier i
XP 400 /
HP 96; Bloodied 48
AC 25. Fortitude 23. Reflex 20. Will 20
Initiative+9 1
Perception +12 U
Speed 6, climb 6, swim 6 Low-light vision
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +14 vs. AC
Hit: 2d10 + 6 damage, and the constrictor grabs the target (escape DC 17).
\ Constrict • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature grabbed by the constrictor); +12 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 2d12 + 8 damage, and the target is dazed until the end of the constrictor's next turn.
Skills Stealth+12
Str 22 (+10) Dex 16 (+7) Wis 17 (+7)
Con 16 (+7) Int 2 (+0) Cha 10 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
0 Death Rattle (fear) • Aura 2
Enemies take a -2 penalty to all defenses while within the aura.
© Bite (poison) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d6 + 4 damage, and the viper makes a secondary attack against the target.
Secondary Attack: Melee 1; +8 vs. Fortitude
Hit: 1d6 + 2 poison damage, and ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends).
Str 12 (+3) Dex 19 (+6) Wis 10 (+2)
Con 15 (+4) Int 2 (-2) Cha 14 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
t n n \ ilia I '.MALI
HP 149; Bloodied 74 Initiative +10
AC 24. Fortitude 25. Reflex 24. Will 23 Perception +9
Speed 6, climb 6 Low-light vision
Resist half damage from melee and ranged attacks;
Vulnerable 10 to close and area attacks
0 Swarm Attack (poison) • Aura 1
An enemy that ends its turn in the aura takes 10 poison damage.
Swarm
The swarm can occupy the same space as another creature, and an enemy can enter its space,
which is difficult terrain. The swarm cannot be pulled, pushed, or slid by melee or ranged
attacks. It can squeeze through any opening that is large enough for at least one of the creatures
it comprises.
STANDARD ACTIONS
<r Swarm of Fangs (poison) • At-will
Attack: Close burst 1 (enemies in the burst); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 8 poison damage, and the target is slowed (save ends).
Skills Stealth +15
Str 22 (+12) Dex 19 (+10) Wis 16 (+9)
Con 19 (+10) Int 1 (+1) Cha 7 (+4)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Spider
Spider S w a rm
Medium natural beast (spider, swarm)
HP 44: Bloodied 22
AC 19. Fortitude 13. Reflex 16. W i l l 15
Speed 6, climb 6 (spider climb)
Resist half damage from melee
and ranged attacks
Level 3 Soldier V
XP 150 / J*
Initiative +6
Perception +3
Tremorsense 5
Vulnerable 5 to close
and area attacks
r
0 Swarm Attack • Aura 1
Any enemy that starts its turn in the aura is slowed until the start of its next turn.
Swarm
The swarm can occupy the same space as another creature, and an enemy can enter its space,
which is difficult terrain. The swarm cannot be pulled, pushed, or slid by melee or ranged
attacks. It can squeeze through any opening that is large enough for at least one of the creatures
it comprises.
Web Walk
The spider ignores difficult terrain composed of webs.
STANDARD ACTIONS
0 Swarm of Fangs (poison) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +6 vs. Reflex
Hit: 1d6 + 3 damage, and ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends).
Skills Athletics +6. Stealth +9
Str 11 (+1) Dex 17 (+4) Wis 14 (+3)
Con 12 (+2) Int 1 (-4) Cha7(-1)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
rim i; T 3 0 1
Deathjump Spider
Medium natural beast (spider)
HP 52: Bloodied 26
AC 18. Fortitude 17, Reflex 16. Will 15
Speed 6, climb 6 (spider climb)
Resist 5 poison
Level 4 Skirmisher
XP 175
Initiative +5
Perception +7
Tremorsense 5
Web Walk
The spider ignores difficult terrain composed of webs.
STANDARD ACTIONS
© Bite (poison) • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +9 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 3 damage, and the target takes ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends).
4 Death from Above • Recharge iJj X I I
Effect: The spider jumps up to 6 squares. This movement does not provoke opportunity attacks.
After the jump, the spider uses bite, knocking the target prone on a hit.
MOVE ACTIONS
Prodigious Leap • Encounter
Effect: The spider jumps up to 10 squares. This movement does not provoke opportunity attacks.
Skills Athletics +9, Stealth +8
Str 14 (+4) Dex 12 (+3) Wis 10(+2)
Con 12 (+3) Int 1 (-3) Cha8(-1)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Doomspinner Spider Level 7 Controller
Large natural beast (spider) XP 300 JSl HP 82; Bloodied 41 Initiative +6
AC 21. Fortitude 20. Reflex 19. Will 19 Perception +11
Speed 6, climb 6 (spider climb) Tremorsense 10
Resist 5 poison
Web Walk
The spider ignores difficult terrain composed of webs.
I STANDARD ACTIONS S c P l
© Bite (poison) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +12 vs. AC
Hit: 1d8 + 6 damage, and ongoing 5 poison damage, or ongoing 10 poison if the target is immobilized,
restrained, stunned, or unconscious (save ends).
•i't Web Casting • At-Will
Attack: Area burst 1 within 5 (creatures in the burst); +10 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target is restrained (save ends).
Effect: Squares in the burst are difficult terrain until the end of the encounter.
MINOR ACTIONS
^ Draw to Doom • At-Will
Attack: Ranged 5 (one creature); +10 vs. Fortitude
Hit: The spider pulls the target up to 4 squares.
Skills Athletics +12. Stealth +11
Str 19 (+7) Dex 16 (+6) Wis 17 (+6)
Con 18 (+7) Int 1 (-2) Cha 9 (-2)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
W
302 A \n»»'llx \nlinill\ | SHIM It
Cave Spider Level 12 M i n i o n Skirmisher
Medium natural beast (spider)
HP 1; a missed attack never damages a minion. Initiative +1S
AC 26. Fortitude 24. Reflex 25. W i l l 22 Perception +11
Speed 6, climb 6 (spider climb) Darkvision, tremorsense 5
Resist 10 poison
Web Walk
The spider ignores difficult terrain composed of webs.
STANDARD ACTIONS
® Bite (poison) • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +17 vs. AC
Hit: 10 damage, plus 5 poison damage if the target is immobilized, restrained, stunned, or
unconscious.
MINOR ACTIONS
•y Tethering Web • At Will
Attack: Ranged 10 (one creature); +15 vs. Reflex
Hit: The target is immobilized until the end of its next turn.
Skills Athletics +17. Stealth +18
Str 22 (+12) Dex 24 (+13) Wis20(+11)
Con 19 (+10) Int 1 (+1) Cha 8 (+5)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
"There's nothing ordinary
about a spider with legs
as long as I am tall and
a body like a cask of
ale. Especially when it
throws its web to tangle
you up or draw you to
its fangs."
—Corrin Riverwander
Wolf
Cray W o l f Level 2 Skirmisher
Medium natural beast XP 125
HP 38; Bloodied 19 Initiative +6
AC 16. Fortitude 14. Reflex 1S. Will 13 Perception +7
Speed 8 Low light vision
TRAITS
STANDARD ACTIONS
<i Bite • At-Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +10 vs. AC
Hit: 2d8 + 4 damage, or 3d8 + 4 against a prone target. The target falls prone if the wolf has
combat advantage against it.
Str 19 (+6) Dex 16 (+5) Wis 14 (+4)
Con 19 (+6) Int 5 (-1) Cha 11 (+2)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
© Bite • At Will
Attack: Melee 1 (one creature); +7 vs. AC
Hit: 1d6 + 5 damage, or 2d6 + 5 against a prone target. If the wolf has combat advantage
against the target, the target falls prone.
Effect: The wolf shifts up to 4 squares.
Str 13 (+2) Dex 16 (+4) Wis 13 (+2)
Con 14 (+3) Int 2 (-3) Cha 10 (+1)
Alignment unaligned Languages -
Dire W o lf
Large natural beast (mount)
HP 67; Bloodied 33
AC 19. Fortitude 18. Reflex 17. Will 16
Speed 8
Level 5 Skirmisher
XP 200
Initiative +7
Perception+9
Low-light vision t
Pack Harrier
The wolf has combat advantage against any enemy that is
adjacent to two or more of the wolf's allies.
Pack Hunter (mount)
The wolfs rider has combat advantage against any enemy that is
adjacent to one of the rider's allies other than the wolf.
1 0 4 1 Am .....I. i II .II I
GLOSSARY
This glossary defines some of the game terms used in this book, as well as terms
related to them. The material here assumes you're familiar with the basic rules of
the game.
aberrant |origin|: Aberrant creatures are native to or shaped by the Far Realm,
acid (keyword]: A damage type. See also damage type,
air |keyword|: An air creature is strongly connected to the element of air.
angel |keyword|: Angels are immortal creatures native to the Astral Sea. They
don't need to breathe, eat. or sleep,
animate |type|: Animate creatures are given life through magic. They don't
need to breathe, eat, or sleep,
aquatic |keyword|: Aquatic creatures can breathe underwater. In aquatic
combat, an aquatic creature gains a +2 bonus to attack rolls against nonaquatic
creatures.
beast (type): Beasts arc either ordinary animals or creatures akin to them. They
behave instinctively,
blind |keyword|: A blind creature relies on special senses, such as blindsight
or tremorsense, to see within a specified range, beyond which the creature
can't see. The creature is immune to gaze attacks and cannot be blinded,
blinded |condition|: While a creature is blinded, it can't see. which means
its targets have total concealment against it. and it takes a -10 penalty to
Perception checks. It also grants combat advantage and can't flank,
blindsight: A creature that has blindsight can clearly see creatures or objects
within a specified range and within line of effect, even if they are invisible or
in obscured squares. The creature otherwise relies on its normal vision,
blocking terrain: A type of terrain that blocks squares, often by filling them.
Examples: Walls, doors, and large pillars. Blocking terrain provides cover,
interferes with movement around it, and blocks line of effect. It also blocks
line of sight, unless it's transparent,
burrow speed: A creature that has a burrow speed can move through loose
earth at a specified speed, and the creature can move through solid stone at
half that speed. The creature can't shift or charge while burrowing.
charm |keyword|: An effect type. A charm power controls a creature's actions
in some way. This control is often represented by the creature being forced to
attack its ally or being subjected to the dominated condition,
climb speed: A creature that has a climb speed moves on vertical surfaces at
that speed without making Athletics checks to climb. While climbing, the
creature ignores difficult terrain, and climbing doesn't cause it to grant
combat advantage.
clumsy: Some creatures are clumsy while using a specific movement mode
(noted next to that mode in the creature's "Speed" entry), and others are
clumsy while on the ground (noted next to the creature's speed). While a
creature is clumsy, it takes a - 4 penalty to attack rolls and all defenses,
cold [keyword|: A damage type. A creature that has this keyword is strongly
connected to cold. See also damage type.
construct |keyword]: Constructs are not living creatures, so effects that specifically
target living creatures do not work against them. They don't need to
breathe, eat, or sleep.
damage type: Many attacks deal a specific type of damage. Each damage type
has a keyword associated with it. If a power has such a keyword, the power
deals that type of damage (the exception is poison, the keyword for which
refers to damage, a nondamaging effect, or both),
darkvision: A creature that has darkvision can see in dim light and darkness
without penalty. This means the creature ignores the -2 penalty to attack
rolls when it attacks a target that has partial concealment as a result of dim
light and the -5 penalty to attack rolls when it attacks a target that has total
concealment as a result of darkness,
dazed |condition|: While a creature is dazed, it doesn't get its normal complement
of actions on its turn; it can take either a standard, a move, or a minor
action. The creature can still take free actions, but it can't take immediate or
opportunity actions. It also grants combat advantage and can't flank,
deafened |condition|: While a creature is deafened, it can't hear, and it takes a
-10 penalty to Perception checks.
demon |keyword|: Demons are chaotic evil elemental creatures native to the
Abyss. They don't need to sleep.
devil |keyword]: Devils are evil immortal creatures native to the Nine Hells.
They don't need to sleep,
disease [keyword]: Some powers expose a creature to a disease. If a creature is
exposed to a disease one or more times during an encounter, it makes one
saving throw at the end of the encounter to determine if it contracts that
disease. If the saving throw fails, the creature is infected,
dominated |condition|: While a creature is dominated, it can't take actions.
Instead, the dominator chooses a single action for the creature to take on
the creature's turn: a standard, a move, a minor, or a free action. The only
powers and other game features that the dominator can make the creature
use are ones that can be used at will, such as at-will powers. For example,
anything that is limited to being used only once per encounter or once per
day does not qualify. In spite of this condition, the creature's allies remain its
allies, and its enemies, its enemies.
In addition, a dominated creature grants combat advantage and
can't flank.
3 0 6 A <,(•>> »<irv | cliiMiiy
dying |condition|: A dying creature is unconscious and must make death saving
throws. Monsters normally die when they drop to 0 hit points, so they suffer
this condition only in exceptional situations.
dragon |keyword|: Dragons are reptilian creatures. Most of them have wings as
well as a breath weapon,
earth |keyword|: An earth creature is strongly connected to earth,
earth walk: A type of terrain walk. A creature that has earth walk ignores difficult
terrain that is rubble, uneven stone, or an earthen construction.
elemental |origin|: Elemental creatures are native to the Elemental Chaos,
extra damage: Many powers and other effects grant the ability to deal extra
damage. Extra damage is always in addition to other damage. This means
an attack that deals no damage, such as the wizard power sleep, can't deal
extra damage.
fear |keyword|: An effect type. A fear power inspires fright. This fright is often
represented by a creature being forced to move, taking a penalty to attack
rolls, or granting combat advantage.
fey |origin|: Fey creatures are native to the Feywild.
fire (keyword]: A damage type. A creature that has this keyword is strongly connected
to fire. See also damage type.
fly speed: A creature that has a fly speed can fly a number of squares up to that
speed as a move action. If it is stunned or knocked prone while flying, it falls.
See also "Flying" in the Rules Compendium.
force |keyword|: A damage type. Sec also damage type,
forest walk: A type of terrain walk. A creature that has forest walk ignores difficult
terrain that is part of a tree, underbrush, or some other forest growth.
gaze (keyword): A kind of attack. Blind or blinded creatures are immune to
gaze attacks, and a creature cannot make a gaze attack while blinded,
giant |keyword]: Giants are Large or larger humanoid creatures that trace their
origin back to the primordials and the Elemental Chaos,
grabbed |condition|: While a creature is grabbed, it is immobilized.
Maintaining this condition on the creature occupies whatever appendage,
object, or effect the grabber used to initiate the grab. This condition ends
immediately on the creature if the grabber is subjected to an effect that prevents
it from taking actions, or if the creature ends up outside the range of
the grabbing power or effect,
half damage: When a power or another effect deals half damage, apply all
modifiers to the damage, including resistances and vulnerabilities, and then
divide the damage in half,
healing |keyword]: An effect type. A healing power restores hit points, usually
either by restoring hit points immediately or by granting regeneration.
heavily obscured: A measure of visibility. A creature has total concealment
when it is in a heavily obscured square, although it has only partial concealment
against an enemy adjacent to it. Examples: Heavy fog. smoke, or foliage.
Contrast with lightly obscured and totally obscured,
helpless (condition]: While a creature is helpless, it grants combat advantage
and can be the target of a coup de grace,
hidden: When a creature is hidden from an enemy, the creature is silent and
invisible to that enemy. A creature normally uses the Stealth skill to become
hidden. See also invisible.
hindering terrain: A type of terrain that hinders creatures, usually by damaging
them. Examples: Pits, lava, and deep water. A creature can make a saving
throw when it is pulled, pushed, slid, or teleported into hindering terrain.
See also teleportation.
homunculus |keyword|: Homunculi are animate constructs tasked with guarding
a creature, an area, or an object,
hover: If a creature can hover, it can remain in the air if it is stunned. See also
fly speed.
humanoid |type|: Humanoid creatures vary greatly in how much they resemble
humans. Most are bipedal,
ice walk: A type of terrain walk. A creature that has ice walk ignores dilPicult
terrain that is ice or snow.
illusion |keyword|: An effect type. An illusion power deceives the mind or the
senses. Illusions often obstruct vision or redirect attacks. If an illusion power
deals damage, the damage itself is not an illusion.
immobilized |condition|: When a creature is immobilized, it can't move,
unless it teleports or is pulled, pushed, or slid,
immortal |origin|: Immortal creatures are native to the Astral Sea. Unless they
are killed, they live forever,
implement [keyword]: An accessory type. This keyword identifies a power that
can be used through an implement. A monster's statistics block notes the
implements it uses.
insubstantial: When a creature is insubstantial, it takes half damage from any
damage source, including ongoing damage. See also half damage.
invisible: If a creature is invisible, it has several advantages against creatures
that can't see it: It has total concealment against them, it doesn't provoke
opportunity attacks from them, and they grant combat advantage to it.
lightly obscured: A measure of visibility. A creature has partial concealment
when it is in a lightly obscured square. Examples: Dim light, foliage, fog,
smoke, and heavy rain or falling snow. Contrast with heavily obscured and
totally obscured.
lightning [keyword]: A damage type. See also damage type.
living construct |keyword|: Unlike other constructs, living constructs are
living creatures.
low-light vision: A creature that has low-light vision can see in dim light without
penalty. This means the creature ignores the -2 penalty to attack rolls when
it attacks a target that has partial concealment as a result of dim light.
magical beast |type|: Magical beasts resemble beasts but often behave
like people.
marked |condition|: When a creature marks a target, it takes a -2 penalty to
attack rolls for any attack that doesn't include the marking creature as a
target. A creature can be subjected to only one mark at a time, and a new
mark supersedes an old one. A mark ends immediately when its creator dies
or falls unconscious.
minion: A minion is destroyed when it takes any damage. If a minion is missed
by an attack that deals damage on a miss, the minion doesn't take that
damage.
mount |keyword]: A creature that has the mount keyword has at least one
mount trait or mount power.
natural |origin|: Natural creatures are native to the natural world.
necrotic |keyword|: A damage type. See also damage type.
once per round: Some effects are usable only once per round (sometimes noted
as "1/round"). If a creature uses such an effect, it can't use the effect again
until the start of its next turn.
ooze |keyword|: Oozes are amorphous creatures.
petrified |condition|: While a creature is petrified, it is unconscious. In addi
tion, it has resist 2 0 to all damage and doesn't age.
phasing: While phasing, a creature ignores difficult terrain and can move
through obstacles and other creatures, but it must end its movement in an
unoccupied space.
plant |keyword|: Plant creatures are composed of vegetable matter. They don't
need to sleep.
poison |keyword|: A damage and effect type. A poison power delivers a
nondamaging poisonous effect, deals poison damage, or both. See also
damage type.
polymorph |keyword|: An effect type. Polymorph powers change a creature's
physical form in some way.
One Polymorph at a Time: If a creature is affected by more than one polymorph
power, only the most recent one has any effect. The other powers'
effects remain on the creature and their durations expire as normal, but
those effects don't apply. However, when the most recent effect ends, the
next most recent one that is still active applies to the creature. For example,
if a hag is under the effect of change shape and a character uses a polymorph
power against the hag, the effect of change shape is suppressed until the character's
polymorph effect ends on the hag.
Changing Size: ffa polymorph power reduces a creature's space, the creature
doesn't provoke opportunity attacks for leaving squares as it shrinks.
If a polymorph effect would make a creature too large to fit in the available
space, the effect fails against the creature, but the creature is stunned
(save ends).
Death Ends: Polymorph effects end on a creature immediately when
it dies.
prone |condition|: When a creature is prone, it is lying down. It takes a -2
penalty to attack rolls, and the only way it can move is by crawling, telcporting,
or being pulled, pushed, or slid. In addition, it grants combat advantage
to enemies making melee attacks against it, but it gains a +2 bonus to all
defenses against ranged attacks from enemies that aren't adjacent to it.
If a creature is flying when it falls prone, it safely descends a distance
equal to its fly speed. Ifit doesn't reach a solid surface, it falls.
A creature can end this condition on itself by standing up. A creature can
drop prone as a minor action.
This condition can affect limbless creatures, such as fish and snakes, as
well as amorphous creatures, such as oozes,
psychic |keyword]: A damage type. Sec also damage type,
radiant |keyword|: A damage type. See also damage type,
removed from play |condition|: Some effects can temporarily remove a creature
from play. While a creature is removed from play, its turns start and end
as normal, but it can't take actions. In addition, it has neither line of sight nor
line of effect to anything, and nothing has line of sight or line of effect to it.
reptile |keyword|: Reptiles are cold-bloodcd creatures that have scaly skin.
restrained [condition]: While a creature is restrained, it can't move, unless it
teleports. It can't even be pulled, pushed, or slid. It also takes a -2 penalty to
attack rolls, and it grants combat advantage,
save: A successful saving throw. A save ends an effect that includes one ofthe
following notations in parentheses: "save ends," "save ends both," or "save
ends all."
shadow |origin|: Shadow creatures are native to the Shadowfcll.
shapechanger | key word]: Shapcchangcrs have the ability to alter their form,
whether freely or into specific forms.
slowed |condition|: When a creature is slowed, its speed becomes 2 ifit was
higher than that. This speed applies to all of the creature's movement modes
(walking, flying, and so on), but it does not apply to forced movement against
it, teleportation, or any other movement that doesn't use the creature's speed.
The creature also cannot benefit from bonuses to speed, although it can take
actions, such as the run action, that allow it to move farther than its speed.
11 O 1 iil^mmmmu I I.'..11.Illl.uil
spider |keyword): Spider creatures include spiders as well as creatures that
have spiderlike features: eight legs, web spinning, and the like.
spider climb: A creature that can spider climb can use its climb speed to move
across overhanging horizontal surfaces (such as ceilings) without making
Athletics checks. See also climb speed,
stunned |condition|: While a creature is stunned, it can't take actions. It also
grants combat advantage and can't flank,
surprised |condition|: While a creature is surprised, it can't take actions. It also
grants combat advantage and can't flank,
swamp walk: A type of terrain walk. A creature that has swamp walk ignores
difficult terrain that is mud or shallow water,
swarm |keyword): A swarm is composed of multiple creatures but functions as
a single creature. A swarm can occupy the same space as another creature,
and an enemy can enter a swarm's space, which is difficult terrain. A swarm
cannot be pulled, pushed, or slid by melee or ranged attacks.
A swarm can squeeze through any opening large enough for even one of
its constituent creatures. For example, a swarm of bats can squeeze through
an opening large enough for one of the bats to squeeze through,
swim speed: A creature that has a swim speed moves through water at that
speed without making Athletics checks to swim.
telepathy: A creature that has telepathy can communicate mentally with any
creature that has a language, even if they don't share the language. The
other creature must be within line of effect and within a specified range.
Telepathy allows for two-way communication,
teleportation |keyword|: An effect type. A teleportation power transports creatures
or objects instantaneously from one location to another,
threatening reach: A creature that has threatening reach can make an
opportunity attack against any enemy within its reach that provokes an
opportunity attack,
thunder |keyword|: A damage type. Sec also damage type.
totally obscured: A measure of visibility. A creature has total concealment
when it is in a totally obscured square. Example: Total darkness. Contrast
with heavily obscured and lightly obscured.
tremorsense: A creature that has tremorsense can clearly see creatures or
objects within a specified range, even if they arc invisible, obscured, or
outside line of effect, but both they and the creature must be in contact with
the ground or the same substance, such as water or a web. The creature otherwise
relies on its normal vision.
tunneling: A creature that has tunneling leaves tunnels behind it as it burrows.
The creature, as well as smaller creatures, can move through these tunnels
without any reduction in speed. Creatures of the same size as the tunneling
creature must squeeze through these tunnels, and larger creatures cannot
move through them at all. See also burrow speed,
unconscious |condition|: While a creature is unconscious, it is helpless, it can't
take actions, and it takes a -5 penalty to all defenses. It also can't flank and is
unaware of its surroundings. When a creature is subjected to this condition,
it falls prone, if possible. See also helpless and prone.
undead |keyword|: Undead are not living creatures, so effects that specifically
target living creatures don't work against them. They don't need to breathe
or sleep.
water |keyword|: A water creature is strongly connected to water,
weakened |condition|: While a creature is weakened, its attacks deal half
damage. However, two kinds of damage that it deals are not affected:
ongoing damage and damage that isn't generated by an attack roll. See also
half damage.
weapon [keyword]: An accessory type. This keyword identifies a power that is
used with a weapon, which can be an unarmed strike. Monster attacks don't
use proficiency bonuses,
zone | key word |: An effect type. Powers that have the zone keyword create
zones, magical areas that last for a round or more.
Fills an Area of Effect: A zone is created within an area of effect and fills
each square in the area that is within line of elfect of the origin square.
Unaffected by Attacks and the Environment: A zone cannot be attacked or
physically affected, and terrain and environmental phenomena have no
effect on it. For example, a zone that deals fire damage is unaffected by
cold damage.
Movable Zones: If the power used to create a zone allows the zone to be
moved, it's a movable zone. At the end of its creator's turn, the movable zone
ends ifit is not within range of at least 1 square of it (using the power's range)
or if the creator doesn't have line of effect to at least 1 square of it.
A zone can't be moved through blocking terrain.
Overlapping Zones: If zones overlap and impose penalties to the same roll
or game statistic, a creature alfccted by the overlapping zones is subjected to
the worst penalty; the penalties are not cumulative. For instance, if a creature
is affected by three overlapping zones that each impose a -2 penalty to
attack rolls, the creature takes a -2 penalty, not a - 6 penalty.
Death Ends: A zone ends immediately when its creator dies.
-
MONSTERS BY LEVEL
Every monster in the book appears on this list, which is sorted alphabetically by
level and monster role.
1 Monster Level and Kole Origin Page 1
Kobold Slingcr 1 Artillery Natural 180
Dire Hat 1 Brute Natural 298
Grasping Zombie 1 Brute Natural 293
Horse 1 Brute Natural 297
Lesser Water Elemental 1 Controller Elemental 109
I f sscr Air Elemental 1 Lurker Elemental 108
Stirge 1 Lurker Natural 259
Dwarf Warrior 1 Minion Artillery Natural 100
(ioblin Sniper 1 Minion Artillery Natural 152
Decrepit Skeleton 1 Minion Skirmisher Natural 255
Kobold Tunneler 1 Minion Skirmisher Natural 179
(ioblin Beast Rider 1 Skirmisher Natural 153
Goblin Cutthroat 1 Skirmisher Natural 154
Kobold Quickblade 1 Skirmisher Natural 180
Lesser Fire Elemental 1 Skirmisher Elemental 109
Scurrying Rat Swarm 1 Skirmisher Natural 299
Dwarf Clan Guard 1 Soldier Natural 101
Fledgling White Dragon 1 Solo Brute Natural 64
Elf Archcr 2 Artillery Fey 110
(iuard Drake 2 Brute Natural 82
Elf Hunter 2 Minion Skirmisher Fey 113
Human Goon 2 Minion Soldier Natural 170
Common Bandit 2 Skirmisher Natural 170
Dragonborn Mercenary 2 Skirmisher Natural 80
Elf Scout 2 Skirmisher Fey 112
Gray Wolf 2 Skirmisher Natural 304
Hallling Thief 2 Skirmisher Natural 169
Kobold Dragonshleld 2 Soldier Natural 181
Lesser Earth Elemental 2 Soldier Elemental 108
Spitting Drake 3 Artillery Natural 83
Foisonscale Brawler 3 Brute Natural 187
Goblin Hex Hurler 3 Controller (leader) Natural 155
Greenscalc Trapper 3 Controller Natural 189
Hobgoblin Beast Master 3 Controller (I.cader) Natural 156
Ochre Jelly 3 Elite Brute Natural 220
Hallling Trickstcr 3 Lurker Natural 169
Imp 3 Lurker Immortal 51
Pseudodragon 3 Lurker Natural 83
IVtisonscale Needier 3 Minion Artillery Natural 187
l)op|M-lganger Sneak 3 Skirmisher Natural 61
Hobgoblin Spear Soldier 3 Skirmisher Natural 157
Sc urrying Wen-rat 3 Skirmisher Natural 194
1 Monster I.evel and Role Origin I'age 1
Rattletcsted Orc 3 Soldier Natural 225
Crocodile 3 Soldier Natural 297
Elf Noble Guatd 3 Soldier Fey 113
Grcenscalc Raider 3 Soldier Natural 188
Hobgoblin Rattle Guard 3 Soldier Natural 157
Spider Swarm 3 Soldier Natural 301
Town Guard 3 Soldier Natural 171
Young White Dragon 3 Solo Brute Natural 67
Hobgoblin Warmonger 4 Artillery (leader) Natural 158
Ore Archer 4 Artillery Natural 226
Bugbear Thug 4 Brute Natural 159
Hulking Zombie 4 Brute Natural 294
Duergar Scout 4 Lurker Natural 94
Green Slime 4 Lurker Natural 221
Duergar Thug 4 Minion Brute Natural 96
Orc Savage 4 Minion Brute Natural 226
Dcathjunip Spider 4 Skirmisher Natural 302
Flesh-Crazed Zombie 4 Skirmisher Natural 295
Grcenscalc Raider 4 Skirmisher Natural 189
Rloodscckrr Drake 4 Soldier Natural 84
Duergar Guard 4 Soldier Natural 95
Young Black Dragon 4 Solo Lurker Natural 68
Blazing Skeleton 5 Artillery Natural 255
Duergar Raid leader 5 Artillery (I.cadcr) Natural 96
Gnoll Huntmastrr 5 Artillery Natural 142
Bear 5 Brute Natural 266
Dcathplcdgcd Gnoll 5 Brute Natural 144
IValbrattle Viper S Brute Natural 300
Rage Drake 5 Brute Natural 84
Ravenous Ghoul 5 Brute Natural 128
Shark 5 Brute Natural 299
Beholder Gauth S Elite Artillery Aberrant 25
Gelatinous Cube S Elite Brute Natural 222
Dryad Rcclusc S Lurker Fey 91
Gargoyle Rake 5 Lurker Elemental 122
Gnome Spy S Lurker Fey 148
Wraith 5 Lurker Shadow 284
Zombie Shambler 5 Minion Brute Natural 295
Stirge Suckcrling 5 Minion Lurker Natural 259
Spitting Cobra S Minion Soldier Natural 300
Bugbear Backstabbcr S Skirmisher Natural 159
Carrion Crawler Scuttler 5 Skirmisher Aberrant 32
Dire Wolf S Skirmisher Natural 304
Orc Reaver 5 Skirmisher Natural 227
Dragonborn Soldier S Soldier Natural SI
(ihoul 5 Soldier Natural 126
Hobgoblin Commander S Soldier (leader) Natural 158
Tiefling Fury 5 Soldier Natural 262
Young Green Dragon 5 Solo Skirmisher Natural 69
314 1 tllllUlMl .1 J
I Minister Level and Hole Origin Page |
Gnome Illusionist 6 Artillery Fey 149
Ore Storm Shaman 6 Artillery Natural 229
Rlackscalc Crusher 6 Brute Natural 191
Frenzied Werewolf 6 Brute Natural 195
Ogre 6 Brute Natural 216
Ore Kampager 6 Brute Natural 228
Greenscalc Bog Mystic 6 Controller (leader) Natural 190
Ore Pummeler 6 Controller Natural 228
Mad Wraith 6 Controller Shadow 286
Troglodyte Grunt 6 Minion Skirmisher Natural 270
Wraith Figment 6 Minion Skirmisher Shadow 287
Ambush Drake 6 Skirmisher Natural 85
Death Husk Stirge 6 Skirmisher Natural 260
Rust Monster 6 Skirmisher Natural 251
Gnoll Blood Caller 6 Soldier Natural 144
Troglodyte Mauler 6 Soldier Natural 269
Young Blue Dragon 6 Solo Artillery Natural 70
Troglodyte Impalcr 7 Artillery Natural 271
(inoll (iorger 7 Brute Natural 145
Troglodyte Thrasher 7 Brute Natural 271
Doomspinner Spider 7 Controller Natural 302
11 Lillian Transmitter 7 Controller Natural 172
Demon-Eye Gnoll 7 Lurker Natural 146
Dire Stirge 7 Lurker Natural 261
Young Bulette 7 Lurker Natural 29
Eladrin Bow Mage 7 Minion Artillery Fey 114
Human Thug 7 Minion Skirmisher Natural 182
Skeletal legionary 7 Minion Soldier Natural 257
Dryad Hunter 7 Skirmisher Fey 92
Fang of Yeenoghu 7 Skirmisher (leader) Natural 145
Gnome Assassin 7 Skirmisher Fey 150
Ogre Hunter 7 Skirmisher Natural 218
Carrion Crawler 7 Soldier Aberrant 33
Eladrin Fey Knight 7 Soldier (leader) Fey 114
Otyugh 7 Soldier Natural 231
Young Red Dragon 7 Solo Soldier Natural 71
Gnoll Far Fang 8 Artillery Natural 146
Gnome Entropist 8 Artillery Natural 151
Ettin Thug 8 Brute Natural 119
Gluttonous Rust Monster 8 Brute Natural 252
Shambling Mummy 8 Brute Natural 212
Young Owlbear 8 Brute Fey 264
Dryad Witch 8 Controller Fey 93
Eladrin Twilight Incanter 8 Controller Fey 115
(•noil Pack l ord 8 Controller (leader) Natural 147
Tit-Ming Occultist 8 Controller Natural 163
Itl.u k Pudding 8 Elite Brute Natural 221
(>\vllH-ar ^^^^^^^ 8 Elite Brute Fey 235
Ettin Wrath Chanter 8 Elite Controller (Leader) Natural 119
I Monster Level and Hole Origin Page 1
Black Pudding Spawn 8 Minion Brute Natural 223
War Hyena 8 Minion Soldier Natural 298
Human Duelist 8 Soldier Natural 173
Minotaur Soldier 8 Soldier Natural 208
Ogre Mercenary 8 Soldier Natural 218
Sovereign Wraith 8 Soldier Shadow 287
Gnoll Demon Spawn 9 Brute Natural 147
Troll 9 Brute Natural 272
Minotaur Magus 9 Controller (leader) Natural 210
Succubus 9 Controller Immortal S2
Bulette ') E l k Skirmisher Natural 30
Gargoyle 9 l urker Elemental 122
Displacer Beast 9 Skirmisher Fey 57
Eladrin Battle Dancer 9 Skirmisher Fey U S
Minotaur Charger 9 Skirmisher Natural 209
Crushgrip Constrictor 9 Soldier Natural 300
Trained Owibear 9 Soldier Fey 236
Young Kust Monster Swarm 9 Soldier Natural 253
Beholder 9 Solo Artillery Aberrant 26
Ettin Hunter 10 Artillery Natural 120
Venom-Eye Basilisk 10 Artillery Natural 22
Ogre Juggernaut 10 Brute Natural 219
Skeletal Tomb Guardian 10 Brute Natural 257
Stirge Suckerling Swarm 10 Brute Natural 261
Vampire Night Witch 10 Controller Natural 282
Charnel Otyugh 10 Elite Soldier Natural 232
Ettin Marauder 10 Elite Soldier Natural 121
Impaling Koper 10 Lurker Elemental 247
Moldcring Mummy 10 Minion Brute Natural 213
Elder Vampire Spawn 10 Minion Soldier Natural 281
Bog Hag 10 Skirmisher Fey 165
Manticore Striker 10 Skirmisher Natural 198
Mesmeric-Eye Basilisk 10 Soldier Natural 21
Bramblewood Treant 10 Soldier Fey 265
Hydra 10 Solo Brute Natural 174
Gargoyle Rock Hurler 11 Artillery Elemental 123
Manticore Impaler 11 Brute Natural 198
Demonic Savage Minotaur 11 Brute Natural 211
Savage Displacer Beast 11 Brute Fey 58
Wilt Eye Basilisk 11 Controller Natural 22
Dire Bear 11 Elite Brute Natural 296
Neo-Otyugh 11 Elite Controller Aberrant 233
Wind-Claw Owibear 11 Elite Controller Fey 237
Doppelganger Infiltrator 11 Lurker Natural 62
legion Devil Hellguard 11 Minion Soldier Immortal 53
Chain Devil 11 Skirmisher Immortal S3
Mummy Tomb Guardian 11 Soldier Natural 213
I Monster Level and Role Origin Page
Medusa Venom Arrow 12 Artillery Natural 202
Bladerager Troll 12 Brute Natural 274
Earth Archon 12 Brute Elemental 18
Snake Swarm 12 Brute Natural 301
Basilisk 12 Controller Natural 23
Green Hag 12 Controller Fey 166
Flesh Golem 12 Elite Brute Natural 160
Cave Roper 12 Elite Controller Elemental 248
Royal Mummy 12 Elite Controller (leader) Natural 214
Umber Hulk 12 Elite Soldier Natural 276
Master Vampire 12 Lurker Natural 283
Dretch Lackey 12 Minion Brute Elemental 44
Drow Stalker 12 Minion Lurker Fey 116
Cave Spider 12 Minion Skirmisher Natural 303
Battle Troll 12 Soldier Natural 273
Githyanki Warrior 12 Soldier Natural 138
Medusa Bodyguard 12 Soldier Natural 201
Flamekiss Hydra 12 Solo Brute Natural 176
Deathbringer Dracolich 12 Solo Controller Natural 72
Abyssal Basilisk 13 Artillery Elemental 23
Drow Arachnomanccr 13 Artillery (Leader) Fey 117
Githyanki Mindslicer 13 Artillery Natural 139
Hill Giant Hunter 13 Artillery Natural 132
Manticore Spike Hurler 13 Artillery Natural 199
Yuan-ti Malison Sharp-Eye 13 Artillery Natural 290
Ghost Troll Render 13 Brute Natural 275
Hill Giant 13 Brute Natural 132
Hill Giant Earth Shaman 13 Controller (leader) Natural 133
Medusa Spirit Charmer 13 Controller Natural 203
Displacer Beast Pack Ixjrd 13 Elite Skirmisher Fey 59
Githyanki legionary 13 Minion Soldier Natural 141
Babau 13 Skirmisher Elemental 45
Drow Vcnomblade 13 Skirmisher Fey 116
Fire Airhon 13 Skirmisher Elemental 18
Githyanki Raider 13 Skirmisher Natural 140
Vrock 13 Skirmishe r Elemental 46
Yuan-ti Malison Stalker 13 Skirmisher Natural 289
Ice Archon 13 Soldier Elemental 19
Manticore Sky Hunter 13 Soldier (Leader) Natural 199
Abyssal Evisccrator 14 Brute Elemental 47
Arena-Trained Ogre 14 Brute Natural 219
Cyclops Crusher 14 Brute Fey 36
1)rider Fanglord 14 Brute Fey 89
Water Arehon 14 Controller Elemental l l)
Lk li Necromancer 14 Elite Controller Natural 183
Mind Flayer Thrall Master 14 Elite Controller (I-eader) Aberrant 205
Wliilcrclaw Owlbear 14 Elite Soldier Fey 237
Night Hag 14 Lurker Fey 167
(!\i Inns Guard 14 Minion Brute Fey 38
I Monster Level and Role Origin Page 1
Cyclops Rambler 14 Skirmisher Fey 38
Drider Shadowspinner 14 Skirmisher Fey 88
Angel of Protection 14 Soldier Immortal 13
Drider 14 Soldier Fey 87
Yuan-ti Abomination 14 Soldier Natural 290
Adult Purple Worm 14 Solo Brute Natural 240
Rakshasa Archer 15 Artillery Natural 244
Yuan-ti Malison Chanter 15 Artillery Natural 291
Umber Hulk Bewildercr 15 Controller Natural 278
Crag Roper 15 Elite Soldier Elemental 249
Rough Dryad 15 Minion Skirmisher Bar 93
Angel of Battle 15 Skirmisher Immortal 14
Umber Hulk Tunnclcr 15 Skirmisher Natural 278
Carrion Crawler Putrcfier 15 Soldier Aberrant 33
Rakshasa Warrior 15 Soldier Natural 243
Rakshasa Mage 16 Controller Natural 245
Earth Titan 16 Elite Brute Elemental 133
Treant 16 Elite Controller Fey 266
Abyssal Ghoul Devourer 16 Lurker Elemental 129
Lich Remnant 16 Minion Artillery Natural 184
Angel of Valor Veteran 16 Minion Soldier Immortal 15
legion Devil Veteran 16 Minion Soldier Immortal 54
Abyssal Ghoul 16 Skirmisher Elemental 128
Cyclops Hewer l b Soldier Fey 39
Fire Giant Flamecrusher 17 Brute Elemental 136
Frost Giant 17 Brute Elemental 134
Duergar Infernal Consort 17 Controller Natural 97
Deep Hulk 17 Elite Brute Natural 279
Death Knight 17 Elite Soldier Natural 42
Enormous Carrion Crawler 17 Elite Soldier Aberrant 35
Stone Golem 17 Elite Soldier Natural 162
Frost Giant Marauder 17 Skirmisher Elemental 134
Elder White Dragon 17 Solo Brute Natural 73
Venom-Maw Hydra 17 Solo Brute Natural 177
Fire Giant Forgecaller 18 Artillery Elemental 137
Treant Grove Guardian 18 Brute Fey 267
Death Knight Blackguard 18 Elite Skirmisher Natural 43
Dire Bulette 18 Elite Skirmisher Natural 31
Mind Flayer Unseen 18 Lurker Aberrant 206
Nabassu Gargoyle 18 Lurker Elemental 124
Abyssal Ghoul Hungerer 18 Minion Soldier Elemental 129
Devil-Bred Duergar 18 Minion Soldier Natural 98
Fire Giant 18 Soldier Elemental 136
Elder Black Dragon 18 Solo l urker Natural 74
1 Monster Level and Role Origin l'aRe |
Angel of Vengeance 19 Elite Brute Immortal 15
Concordant Mind Flayer 19 Controller (leader) Aberrant 207
Blackmot Treant 19 Elite Soldier Fey 267
Doppelganger Master
Assassin __
19 Lurker Natural 63
Beholder Eye Tyrant 19 Solo Artillery Aberrant 27
Elder Green Dragon
Purple Worm Tunneler
19 Solo Skirmisher
19 Solo Skirmisher
Natural
Natural
75
241
Frost Titan
Duergar Underlord
Iron Golem
20 Elite Brute
20 Elite Skirmisher (leader)
Elemental
Natural
135
99
20 Elite Soldier Natural 163
Ice Devil 20 Soldier Immortal 54
Elder Blue Draeon 20 Solo Artillery Natural 76
Fire Titan 21 Elite Soldier Elemental 137
Lich Soulreaver 22 Artillery (leader) Natural 185
lie/rou ___ 22 Brute Elemental 48
Efreet Fircblade 22 Soldier Elemental 103
Dracolich Doomlord 22 Solo Controller Natural 19
Elder Red Draeon 22 Solo Soldier Natural 77
Efreet Cinderlord 23 Artillery Elemental 104
Rocktcmpcst Gargoyle 23 Elite Lurker Elemental 125
KfnTt Flamestrider 23 Skirmisher Elemental 105
Marilith 24 Elite Skirmisher Elemental 48
Pit Fiend 26 Elite Soldier (leader) Immortal 55
Ralor 27 Elite Brute Elemental 49
D&D Encounters1* is an exciting, weekly gaming program
that lets you play in an ongoing D&D campaign-one epic encounter
at a time.
As you defeat enemies, solve puzzles, finish quests, and perform
heroic deeds, you'll earn "renown" points that you can use to get
exclusive rewards that will give your character an in-game advantage.
Find a store near you.
DUNGEOISISANDDRAGONS.COM





















