(Enterprise is at Red Alert as she orbits a muddy looking planet. Every so often the ship shakes.) 
KIRK: Stay on top of it, Mister Sulu. 
SULU: We're holding orbit, sir. The helm is sluggish. 
SCOTT: Control circuits threatening to overload, Captain. 
KIRK: Understood, Engineer. Mister Spock? We can't avoid these areas of turbulence. 
SPOCK: I believe we'll have them plotted in a few more orbits, Captain. 
(Sulu's console explodes and he is thrown to the floor, unconscious.) 
KIRK: Sickbay. To the Bridge. 
SCOTT: Switching to manual, Captain. Do we maintain this orbit? 
KIRK: Spock? 
SPOCK: This is of great scientific importance, Captain. We're actually passing through ripples in time. 
KIRK: Maintain orbit. Open the channel to Starfleet Command. Precautionary measure, Lieutenant. Broadcast to Starfleet Command my past week's log entries, starting with the unusual readings we had on the instruments and how they led us here. Inform Starfleet Command that apparently something or someone down on this planet 
(McCoy enters) 
KIRK: (pointing to Sulu) Bones. Can effect changes in time, causing turbulent waves of space displacement. 
MCCOY: Some heart flutter. Better risk a few drops of cordrazine. 
KIRK: Tricky stuff. Are you sure you want to risk 
(The hypo is administered and Sulu opens his eyes.) 
MCCOY: You were about to make a medical comment, Jim? 
KIRK: Who, me, Doctor? 
SCOTT: (at the helm) We're guiding around most of the time ripples now. 
KIRK: Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: All plotted but one, Captain. Coming up on it now. Seems to be fairly heavy displacement. 
(And they hit it just as McCoy still has the hypo in his hand, and the jolt results in him injecting it into his own stomach.) 
KIRK: Bones! Get back to your positions. 
SPOCK: The hypo, Captain. 
KIRK: It was set for cordrazine. 
SPOCK: Empty. 
KIRK: Communications, emergency medical team. 
MCCOY: (screams) Killers! Assassins! I won't let you! I'll kill you first! I won't let you! You won't get me! Murderers! Killers! 
(He dashes into the turbolift.) 
KIRK: Security alert.

Captain's log, supplemental entry. Two drops of cordrazine can save a man's life. A hundred times that amount has just accidentally been pumped into Doctor McCoy's body. In a strange, wild frenzy, he has fled the ship's Bridge. All connecting decks have been placed on alert. We have no way of knowing if the madness is permanent or temporary, or in what direction it will drive McCoy.

[Transporter room]

(McCoy enters, knocks out the Chief very quickly and scientifically, then beams himself away.)

[Bridge]

KIRK: Continue alert, decks four through eleven. The medical department knows as little as we do. In dosages approaching this, there's some record of wild paranoia. 
SPOCK: Confirmed by the library record tapes, Captain. Subjects failed to recognise acquaintances, became hysterically convinced that they were in mortal danger, and were seeking escape at any cost. Extremely dangerous to himself or to anyone else who might 
GALLOWAY [OC]: Bridge, Security. Alert, alert! 
KIRK: Bridge here. Go ahead.

[Transporter room]

GALLOWAY: Security 054, sir. We just found the transport chief injured.

[Bridge]

CHIEF [OC]: Captain, Doctor McCoy has beamed himself down to the planet. 
SPOCK: And the transporter at that time, Captain, was focused on the centre of the time disturbance. 
KIRK: So whatever's down there, McCoy is in the heart of it. Set up a landing party. Let's go get him. Kirk out.

[Planet surface]

(The landing party is Kirk, Spock, Scott, Uhura and two security guards. Among remains of fluted columns and fragments of Greek-style buildings is an irregular dough-nut shaped object with lights in it.) 
KIRK: These ruins extend to the horizon. Begin recording. 
UHURA: Recording, sir. 
SPOCK: And of considerable age. On the order of ten thousand centuries old. 
KIRK: Detail, fan out. What is this thing, Mister Spock? It seems to be pulsating with power of some kind. Analysis, please. 
SPOCK: Unbelievable, Captain. 
KIRK: That's funny. 
SPOCK: This single object is the source of all the time displacement. 
KIRK: Explain. 
SPOCK: I can't. For this to do what it does is impossible by any science I understand. It is operating even now. Putting out waves and waves of time displacement, which we picked up millions of miles away. 
UHURA: Landing party to Enterprise. No sign of Doctor McCoy. Search progressing. 
(And he pops up from behind a rock after she and her security guard have passed by.) 
SPOCK: Incredible power. It can't be a machine as we understand mechanics. 
KIRK: Then what is it? 
GUARDIAN: (The doughnut pulses bright in time with the words) A question. Since before your sun burned hot in space and before your race was born, I have awaited a question. 
KIRK: What are you? 
GUARDIAN: I am the Guardian of Forever. 
KIRK: Are you machine or being? 
GUARDIAN: I am both and neither. I am my own beginning, my own ending. 
SPOCK: I see no reason for answers to be couched in riddles. 
GUARDIAN: I answer as simply as your level of understanding makes possible. 
SPOCK: A time portal, Captain. A gateway to other times and dimensions, if I'm correct. 
GUARDIAN: As correct as possible for you. Your science knowledge is obviously primitive. 
SPOCK: Really. 
KIRK: Annoyed, Spock? 
GUARDIAN: Behold. A gateway to your own past, if you wish. 
(A camel train passing a pyramid, ancient Rome - images appear inside the doughnut.) 
MCCOY: Killers! Killers! I won't let you get me! I'll kill you first! I won't let you get me! Assassins! Murderers! Killers! 
(Scott and a guard manage to grab McCoy, and Spock neck-pinches him. An army of lancers charge across the doughnut.) 
KIRK: Spock! If that is a doorway back through time, could we somehow take Bones back a day in time, then 
SPOCK: Relive the accident. This time be certain that the hypo accident is avoided. Look at the speed with which the centuries are passing, Captain. To step through on precisely the day we wish
KIRK: Guardian. Can you change the speed at which yesterday passes? 
GUARDIAN: I was made to offer the past in this manner. I cannot change. 
(The US cavalry charges.) 
KIRK: Strangely compelling, isn't it? To step through there and lose oneself in another world. 
SPOCK: I am a fool. My tricorder is capable of recording even at this speed. I've missed taping centuries of living history which no man before has ever 
(But McCoy has woken up, and dashes towards the Guardian.) 
SCOTT: Doctor McCoy! 
KIRK: Bones, no! 
(McCoy leaps through the doughnut and the pictures stop. He's gone.) 
KIRK: Where is he? 
GUARDIAN: He has passed into... what was. 
UHURA: Captain, I've lost contact with the ship. I was talking to them. Suddenly, it went dead. No static, just nothing. 
KIRK: Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty. 
SCOTT: Nothing wrong with the communicator, sir. 
GUARDIAN: Your vessel, your beginning, all that you knew is gone. 
KIRK: McCoy has somehow changed history. 
SCOTT: You mean we're stranded down here? 
SPOCK: With no past, no future. 
UHURA: Captain, I'm frightened. 
KIRK: Earth's not there. At least, not the Earth we know. We're totally alone.

Captain's log, no stardate. For us, time does not exist. McCoy, back somewhere in the past, has effected a change in the course of time. All Earth history has been changed. There is no starship Enterprise. We have only one chance. We have asked the Guardian to show us Earth's history again. Spock and I will go back into time ourselves and attempt to set right what ever it was that McCoy changed.

SPOCK: I was recording images at the time McCoy left. A rather barbaric period in your American history. I believe I can approximate just when to jump. Perhaps within a month of the correct time. A week, if we're fortunate. 
KIRK: Make sure we arrive before McCoy got there. It's vital we stop him before he does whatever it was that changed all history. Guardian, if we are successful 
GUARDIAN: Then you will be returned. It will be as though none of you had gone. 
UHURA: Captain, it seems impossible. Even if you were able to find the right date 
SCOTT: Then even finding McCoy would be a miracle. 
SPOCK: There is no alternative. 
KIRK: Scotty, when you think you've waited long enough. Each of you will have to try it. Even if you fail, at least you'll be alive in some past world somewhere. 
SCOTT: Aye. 
SPOCK: Seconds now, sir. Stand by. 
SCOTT: Good luck, gentlemen. 
UHURA: Happiness at least, sir. 
(First World War images.) 
SPOCK: And now.

[Street]

(They leap through a wall with a poster for boxing at Madison Square Gardens. Welcome to the Depression.) 
KIRK: I've seen old photographs of this period. An economic upheaval had occurred. 
SPOCK: It was called Depression, circa 1930. Quite barbaric. 
(Two women give then curious looks, and Spock hides his ears with his hands.) 
KIRK: We seem to be costumed a little out of step with the time. 
SPOCK: I'm afraid I'm going to be difficult to explain in any case, Captain. 
KIRK: Well, Mister Spock, if we can't disguise you, we'll find some way of explaining you. 
SPOCK: That should prove interesting. 
KIRK: Let's get out of here. 
(They are nearly run down crossing the street.) 
SPOCK: Fascinating. 
DRIVER: Look out, will you? Why don't you watch where you're going? 
(They head into an alley with washing hanging out on the fire escape.) 
SPOCK: Theft, Captain? 
KIRK: Well, we'll steal from the rich and give back to the poor later. I think I'm going to like this century. Simple, easier to manage. We're not going to have any difficulty explaining 
(Then he sees the policeman.) 
POLICEMAN: Well? 
KIRK: You're a police officer. I recognise the traditional accoutrements. 
SPOCK: You were saying you'll have no trouble explaining it. 
KIRK: My friend is obviously Chinese. I see you've noticed the ears. They're actually easy to explain. 
(A crowd is gathering.) 
SPOCK: Perhaps the unfortunate accident I had as a child. 
KIRK: The unfortunate accident he had as a child. He caught his head in a mechanical rice picker. But fortunately, there was an American missionary living close by who was actually a skilled plastic surgeon in civilian life. 
POLICEMAN: All right, all right. Drop those bundles and put your hands on that wall there! Come on! 
KIRK: Oh, how careless of your wife to let you go out that way. 
POLICEMAN: What? Where? 
SPOCK: Oh, yes, it's quite untidy. Here, let me help you. 
(And a quick neck pinch in front of witnesses, then they grab the clothes and run off. With whistles blowing, they duck down the alley beside the 21st Street Mission and down the stairs to the cellar.)

[Cellar]

KIRK: You were actually enjoying my predicament back there. At times, you seem quite human. 
SPOCK: Captain, I hardly believe that insults are within your prerogative as my commanding officer. 
KIRK: Sorry. 
(They get changed into jeans and shirts.) 
KIRK: Time we faced the unpleasant facts. 
SPOCK: First, I believe we have about a week before McCoy arrives, but we can't be certain. 
KIRK: Arrives where? Honolulu, Boise, San Diego? Why not Outer Mongolia, for that matter? 
SPOCK: There is a theory. There could be some logic to the belief that time is fluid, like a river, with currents, eddies, backwash. 
KIRK: And the same currents that swept McCoy to a certain time and place might sweep us there, too. 
SPOCK: Unless that is true, Captain, we have no hope. Frustrating. Locked in here is the place and moment of his arrival, even the images of what he did. If only I could tie this tricorder in with the ship's computers for just a few moments. 
KIRK: Couldn't you build some form of computer aid here? 
SPOCK: In this zinc-plated vacuum-tubed culture? 
KIRK: Yes, well, it would pose an extremely complex problem in logic, Mister Spock. Excuse me. I sometimes expect too much of you. 
(The lights come on.) 
EDITH: Who's there? 
(Spock puts on a woolen hat that was conveniently amongst the clothes Kirk stole. A young woman wearing an apron comes down the stairs.) 
KIRK: Excuse us, miss. We didn't mean to trespass. It's cold outside. 
EDITH: A lie is a poor way to say hello. It isn't that cold. 
KIRK: No. We were being chased by a policeman. 
EDITH: Why? 
KIRK: These clothes. We stole them. We didn't have any money. 
EDITH: Well, I could do with some help around here. Doing dishes, sweeping, general cleaning. 
SPOCK: At what rate of payment? I need radio tubes and so forth. My hobby. 
EDITH: Fifteen cents an hour for ten hours a day. What are your names? 
KIRK: Mine is Jim Kirk. His is Spock. 
EDITH: I'm Edith Keeler. You can start by cleaning up down here. 
KIRK: Excuse me, Miss. Where are we? 
EDITH: You're in the 21st Street Mission. 
KIRK: Do you run this place? 
EDITH: Indeed I do, Mister Kirk. 
(She leaves them.) 
KIRK: Radio tubes and so on. I approve of hobbies, Mister Spock.

[Canteen]

(Kirk and Spock collect their bowls of soup and pieces of bread, and sit at one of the long tables.) 
EDITH: Good evening. 
(She steps up onto a small stage with a piano.) 
MAN: You'll be sorry. 
KIRK: Why? 
MAN: You expect to eat for free or something? You got to listen to Goody Two-shoes. 
EDITH: Now, as I'm sure somebody out there has said, it's time to pay for the soup. 
MAN: Not that she's a bad-looking broad, but if she really wanted to help out a fella in need 
KIRK: Shut up. Shut up. I want to hear what she has to say. 
SPOCK: Yes, of course, Captain. 
EDITH: Now, let's start by getting one thing straight. I'm not a do-gooder. If you're a bum, if you can't break off of the booze or whatever it is that makes you a bad risk, then get out. Now I don't pretend to tell you how to find happiness and love when every day is just a struggle to survive, but I do insist that you do survive because the days and the years ahead are worth living for. One day soon man is going to be able to harness incredible energies, maybe even the atom. Energies that could ultimately hurl us to other worlds in some sort of spaceship. And the men that reach out into space will be able to find ways to feed the hungry millions of the world and to cure their diseases. They will be able to find a way to give each man hope and a common future, and those are the days worth living for. Our deserts will bloom. (She continues under the dialogue.) 
KIRK: Development of atomic power is years away, and space flight years after that. 
SPOCK: Speculation. Gifted insight. 
KIRK: I find her most uncommon, Mister Spock. 
EDITH: Prepare for tomorrow. Get ready. Don't give up. 
(Later, when the bowls are being handed in, Edith calls after Kirk.) 
EDITH: Mister Kirk. You are uncommon workmen. That basement looks like it's been scrubbed and polished. 
KIRK: Then we can report back for other work? 
EDITH: Yes. Seven o'clock in the morning. Do you have a flop for the night? 
KIRK: A what? 
EDITH: You really are new at this, aren't you? A flop is a place to sleep. 
KIRK: Oh. 
EDITH: There's a vacant room at the place where I live for two dollars a week. If you want to I'll take you there. 
KIRK: Thank you. 
EDITH: Good. 
(She goes to get her coat.) 
KIRK: We have a flop. 
SPOCK: We have a what, Captain? 
KIRK: A place to sleep. 
SPOCK: One might have said so in the first place.

[Room]

(It must be some days later, because Spock has already built a 50's horror movie contraption, complete with static electricity running between two vertical wires. Kirk enters with groceries.) 
SPOCK: Captain, I must have some platinum. A small block would be sufficient, five or six pounds. By passing certain circuits through there to be used as a duodynetic field core. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, I've brought you some assorted vegetables, baloney in a hard rolls for myself, and I've spent the other nine tenths of our combined salaries for the last three days on filling this order for you. Mister Spock, this bag doesn't contain platinum, silver or gold, nor is it likely to in the near future. 
SPOCK: Captain, you're asking me to work with equipment which hardly very far ahead of stone knives and bearskins. 
KIRK: McCoy will be along in a few days, perhaps sooner. There's no guarantee that these currents in time will bring us together. This has to work. 
SPOCK: Captain. Captain, in three weeks at this rate, possibly a month, I might reach the first mnemonic memory circuits. 
(There's a knock at the door.) 
KIRK: Your hat. 
EDITH: If you can leave immediately, I can get you five hours work at twenty two cents an hour. What? What on Earth is that? 
SPOCK: I am endeavouring, ma'am, to construct a mnemonic memory circuit using stone knives and bearskins.

[Canteen]

(Kirk and Spock are sweeping the floor, with the chairs stacked on the tables, and two men repairing clocks.) 
SPOCK: Captain. Tools for finely detailed work. 
(Later, a combination padlock is being opened by someone with very sensitive ears.)

[Cellar]

(Spock is stoking the boiler when Edith comes in to confront them.) 
EDITH: That toolbox was locked with a combination lock and you opened it like a real pro. Why did you do it? 
SPOCK: I needed the fine tools for my radio work. They'd have been returned in the morning. 
EDITH: I'm sorry, I can't 
KIRK: If Mister Spock says that he needs the tools and that they'll be returned tomorrow morning, you can bet your reputation on that, Miss Keeler. 
EDITH: On one condition. Walk me home? I still have a few questions I'd like to ask about you two. Oh, and don't give me that questions about little old us? look. You know as well as I do how out of place you two are around here. 
SPOCK: Interesting. Where would you estimate we belong, Miss Keeler? 
EDITH: You? At his side, as if you've always been there and always will. And you? You belong in another place. I don't know where or how. I'll figure it out eventually. 
SPOCK: I'll finish with the furnace. 
EDITH: Captain. Even when he doesn't say it, he does.

[Street]

(They are strolling along, hand in hand, as 'Goodnight, Sweetheart' carries in the air from a radio repair shop.) 
EDITH: Why does Spock call you Captain? Were you in the war together? 
KIRK: We served together. 
EDITH: And you don't want to talk about it? Why? Did you do something wrong? Are you afraid of something? Whatever it is, let me help. 
KIRK: Let me help. A hundred years or so from now, I believe, a famous novelist will write a classic using that theme. He'll recommend those three words even over I love you. 
EDITH: Centuries from now? Who is he? Where does he come? Where will he come from? 
KIRK: Silly question. Want to hear a silly answer? 
EDITH: Yes. 
KIRK: A planet circling that far left star in Orion's belt. See? 
(Not that you can actually see any stars in the night sky above the Brooklyn Bridge.)

[Room]

(Using the clock-mender's tools, Spock gets an image on his tricorder screen of a newspaper report. Edith Keeler, social worker from 21st Street Mission was killed today, it says. Kirk enters.) 
KIRK: How are the stone knives and bearskins? 
SPOCK: I may have found our focal point in time. 
KIRK: You may also find you have a connection burning someplace. 
SPOCK: Yes. I'm overloading those lines. I believe we'll have our answer on this screen. 
KIRK: Good. 
SPOCK: And, Captain, you may find this a bit distressing. 
KIRK: Let's see what you have. 
SPOCK: I've slowed down the recording we made from the time vortex. 
KIRK: February 23rd, 1936. Six years from now. (reading below the headline FDR confers with slum area 'angel') The President and Edith Keeler conferred for some time today 
(Then the whole thing goes up in flames.) 
KIRK: How bad? 
SPOCK: Bad enough. 
KIRK: The President and Edith Keeler. 
SPOCK: It would seem unlikely, Jim. A few moments ago, I read a 1930 newspaper article. 
KIRK: We know her future. Within six years from now, she'll become very important. Nationally famous. 
SPOCK: Or Captain, Edith Keeler will die this year. I saw her obituary. Some sort of traffic accident. 
KIRK: You must be mistaken. They both can't be true. 
SPOCK: Captain, Edith Keeler is the focal point in time we've been looking for, the point that both we and Doctor McCoy have been drawn to. KIRK: She has two possible futures then, and depending on whether she lives or dies, all of history will be changed. And McCoy 
SPOCK: Is the random element. 
KIRK: In his condition, what does he do? Does he kill her? 
SPOCK: Or perhaps he prevents her from being killed. We don't know which. 
KIRK: Get this thing fixed. We must find out before McCoy arrives. 
SPOCK: Captain, suppose we discover that in order to set things straight again, Edith Keeler must die?

[Street]

(The man from the canteen steals a milk bottle from a doorstep when McCoy leaps in through Singers Book Store window and starts shouting.) 
MCCOY: Assassins! Murderers! Murderers! Assassins! You! What planet is this? (he drops the bottle) No! Don't run! I won't kill you! It's they who do the killing! Don't run! I won't kill you!

[Boarding house]

(Jim and Edith are climbing the stairs together.) 
EDITH: Why? What is so funny about man reaching for the moon? 
KIRK: How do you know? 
EDITH: I just know, that's all. I feel it. And more, I think that one day they'll take all the money they spend now on war and death 
KIRK: And make them spend it on life? 
EDITH: Yes. You see the same things that I do. We speak the same language. 
KIRK: The very same. 
(They are outside room 33 when he leans in for the kiss.)

[Street]

(McCoy catches the down-and-out.) 
MAN: No! 
MCCOY: I'm glad you got away, too. Why do you think they want to kill us? 
MAN: Look, fella, you take a sip too much of that old wood alky, and, and almost anything seems like it 
MCCOY: Where? Where are we? Earth? The constellations seem right, but. Explain! Explain this trick. 
MAN: I, I, 
MCCOY: Biped. Small. Good cranial development. No doubt considerable human ancestry. Is that how you're able to fake all of this? Very good. Modern museum perfection. Right down to the cement beams. Very, very good. Oh, I'd give a lot to see the hospital. Probably needles and sutures. All the pain. They used to hand-cut and sew people like garments. Needles and sutures. Oh, the terrible pain! 
(He passes out on the ground and his colour starts to improve. The man frisks him, finds his phaser and runs off a little way. Then he fiddles with the phaser, and disintegrates himself.)

[Room]

KIRK: How long before we get a full answer? 
SPOCK: I'll need at least two more days before I dare make another attempt. 
KIRK: McCoy could have been in the city a week now for all we know, and whatever he does that affects her and changes history could happen tonight or tomorrow morning. 
SPOCK: Captain, our last bit of information was obtained at the expense of thirty hours work in fused and burned circuits. 
KIRK: I must know whether she lives or dies, Spock. I must know what to do.

[Street]

(It's morning, apparently. Bums are still sleeping in shop doorways.) 
CRIER [OC]: Extra! Extra! Get your morning paper! Get your paper. Read all about it! 
(McCoy spots men going into the Mission and follows them.)

[Canteen]

(Edith is pouring cups of brown liquid.) 
MCCOY: Oh, Miss. That coffee, it just smells wonderful. 
EDITH: You look terrible! You'd better sit down. Come on. 
MCCOY: I can't. I got to keep moving. I can't let them find me. 
EDITH: There's a cot in the back room. They won't find you there. Come on. 
(She helps him out just as Spock comes in and starts serving the drinks.

[Room]

SPOCK: This is how history went after McCoy changed it. Here, in the late 1930s. A growing pacifist movement whose influence delayed the United States' entry into the Second World War. While peace negotiations dragged on, Germany had time to complete its heavy-water experiments. 
KIRK: Germany. Fascism. Hitler. They won the Second World War. 
SPOCK: Because all this lets them develop the A-bomb first. There's no mistake, Captain. Let me run it again. Edith Keeler. Founder of the peace movement. 
KIRK: But she was right. Peace was the way. 
SPOCK: She was right, but at the wrong time. With the A-bomb, and with their V2 rockets to carry them, Germany captured the world. 
KIRK: No. 
SPOCK: And all this because McCoy came back and somehow kept her from dying in a street accident as she was meant to. We must stop him, Jim. 
KIRK: How did she die? What day? 
SPOCK: We can estimate general happenings from these images, but I can't trace down precise actions at exact moments, Captain. I'm sorry. 
KIRK: Spock, I believe I'm in love with Edith Keeler. 
SPOCK: Jim, Edith Keeler must die.

[Mission back room]

(McCoy stirs, dislodging the moist towel from his forehead.) 
EDITH: Hey, now, come on. You're not ready to take on any tigers just yet. Lie down. 
MCCOY: The most common question to ask would be, where am I? I don't think I'll ask it. 
EDITH: Why not? 
MCCOY: The only possible answer would conclusively prove that I'm either unconscious or demented. This looks like old Earth around 1920 or 25. 
EDITH: Would you care to try for 30? 
MCCOY: I am unconscious, or demented. 
EDITH: I have a friend that talks about Earth the same way that you do. Would you like to meet him? 
MCCOY: I'm a surgeon, not a psychiatrist. I am Leonard McCoy, Senior Medical Officer aboard the USS Enterprise. 
EDITH: I don't mean to disbelieve you, but that's hardly a Navy uniform. 
MCCOY: It's quite all right. It's quite all right dear, because I don't believe in you, either. 
EDITH: Get some rest.

[Boarding house]

(Edith has just gone up a flight of stairs.) 
KIRK: Edith. 
EDITH: Are you following me, sir? 
KIRK: With ulterior motives. Does that please you? 
EDITH: I hope it means (she stumbles on the step and Kirk catches her, while Spock watches.) Oh! How stupid! I've been up and down those stairs a thousand times. I could have broken my neck. 
(Spock goes back into room 21 as she kisses Jim, and re-emerges when Kirk comes down the stairs again.)
SPOCK: Captain, I did not plan to eavesdrop. 
KIRK: No, of course you didn't. 
SPOCK: I must point out that when she stumbled, she might have died right there, had you not caught her. 
KIRK: It's not yet time. McCoy isn't here. 
SPOCK: We're not that sure of our facts. Who's to say when the exact time will come? Save her, do as your heart tells you to do, and millions will die who did not die before.

[Mission back room]

(McCoy is out of bed.) 
MCCOY: Come in. 
EDITH: Well, you look just fine, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Thank you. 
EDITH: I thought you might like to see the evening paper. 
MCCOY: No, not particularly. You know, I've convinced myself that this is all in a cordrazine hallucination, but I've decided you're not. 
EDITH: That's reassuring. 
MCCOY: But if you're not, what are you? 
EDITH: A friend. When you showed up here, you looked like you could use one. 
MCCOY: I don't doubt it. What about this place? Do you run it? 
EDITH: I try to. 
MCCOY: Why? 
EDITH: It's necessary. 
MCCOY: Well, it was for me, at least. You may have saved my life. 
EDITH: Lots of people drink from the wrong bottle sometimes. 
MCCOY: Not as wrong as the bottle I drank from. Allow me to show my gratitude. Perhaps there's something I can do around here to thank you. 
EDITH: We can talk about that later. I have to go. My young man is taking me to a Clark Gable movie. 
MCCOY: A who movie? 
EDITH: A Clark Gable. Don't you know? 
MCCOY: Well, I know what a movie is, but. 
EDITH: That's very strange. You get some rest. I'll see you later.

[Street]

(Edith, Kirk and Spock leave the Mission together, then Spock heads off alone. Kirk and Edith dodge traffic to cross the street.) 
EDITH: If we hurry, maybe we can catch the Clark Gable movie at the Orpheum. 
KIRK: What? 
EDITH: You know, Doctor McCoy said the same thing. 
KIRK: McCoy! Leonard McCoy? 
EDITH: Yes. He's in the Mission. He's 
KIRK: Stay right here. Spock! Stay right there! 
SPOCK: What is it? 
KIRK: McCoy! He's in 
(McCoy comes out and they greet each other enthusiastically. A truck is coming down the street as Edith starts to cross, not looking.) 
SPOCK: No, Jim! 
KIRK: Edith. 
(McCoy dashes forward but Kirk grabs him and pulls him back onto the pavement just as Edith and the truck meet in in a squeal of brakes.) 
MCCOY: You deliberately stopped me, Jim. I could have saved her. Do you know what you just did? 
SPOCK: He knows, Doctor. He knows.

[Planet surface]

(Kirk and Spock leap back out of the Guardian.) 
SCOTT: What happened, sir? You only left a moment ago. 
(McCoy returns.) 
SPOCK: We were successful. 
GUARDIAN: Time has resumed its shape. All is as it was before. Many such journeys are possible. Let me be your gateway. 
UHURA: Captain, the Enterprise is up there. They're asking if we want to beam up. 
KIRK: Let's get the hell out of here.

Captain's log, Star date 1312.4. The impossible has happened. From directly ahead, we're picking up a recorded distress signal, the call letters of a vessel which has been missing for over two centuries. Did another Earth ship once probe out of the galaxy as we intend to do? What happened to it out there? Is this some warning they've left behind?
[Briefing room]

SPOCK: Your move, Captain. 
KIRK: We should have intercepted by now. The Bridge said they'd call. 
SPOCK: I'll have you checkmated your next move. 
KIRK: Have I ever mentioned you play a very irritating game of chess, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Irritating? Ah, yes. One of your Earth emotions. 
KIRK: Certain you don't know what irritation is? 
SPOCK: The fact one of my ancestors married a human female 
KIRK: Terrible having bad blood like that. 
KELSO [on monitor] Bridge to briefing lounge. Object is now within tractor beam range. 
KIRK: No visual contact, Mister Kelso? 
KELSO [on monitor]: No, sir. It's too small to be a vessel. It only reads about one metre in diameter. 
SPOCK: Not large enough even for a lifeboat. 
KELSO [on monitor] Small enough to bring it aboard, sir, if you want to risk it. 
KIRK: Lock onto it, Mister Kelso.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Materialiser ready, sir. 
KIRK: Bring it aboard. Old-style ship recorder that could be ejected when something threatened the ship. 
SPOCK: More like destroyed the ship in this case. Look at it. Burnt, pitted. 
KIRK: Let's hope its tapes are intact. We'll feed it through Mister Spock's computer. 
SCOTT: Yes, sir. It's begun transmitting, sir. 
KIRK: Flash the Bridge. Put all decks on the alert.

[Turbolift]

MITCHELL: Hold it, Jim. 
KIRK: Getting into shape? 
MITCHELL: Yeah, well I figured you weren't on the Bridge. Kelso's voice sounded a little nervous. Well, uh, you finish the game? 
SPOCK: He played most illogically. His next move should have been the rook.

[Bridge]

MITCHELL: Yore relieved, Mister Alden. 
ALDEN: Acknowledged, Mister Mitchell. 
KIRK: Screen on. 
KELSO: Screen on, sir. Approaching galaxy edge, sir. 
KIRK: Neutralise warp, Mister Mitchell. Hold this position. 
MITCHELL: Neutralise warp, sir. 
KIRK: Address intercraft. 
MITCHELL: Intercraft open. 
KIRK: This is the Captain speaking. The object we encountered is a ship's disaster recorder, apparently ejected from the S.S. Valiant two hundred years ago. 
SPOCK: The tapes are burnt out. Trying the memory banks. 
KIRK: We hope to learn from the recorder what the Valiant was doing here and what destroyed the vessel. We'll move out into our probe as soon as we have those answers. All decks, stand by. 
MITCHELL: Department heads, sir. You wanted everybody on the Bridge before we left the galaxy. Jones. SMITH: The name's Smith, sir. 
SULU: Astro sciences standing by, Captain. 
SCOTT: Engineering division ready, as always. 
PIPER: Life sciences ready, sir. This is Doctor Dehner, who joined the ship at the Aldebaran colony. 
DEHNER: Psychiatry, Captain. My assignment is to study crew reaction in emergency conditions. 
SPOCK: Getting something from the recorder now. 
DEHNER: lf there was an emergency, I'd be interested in how that crew reacted, too. 
MITCHELL: Improving the breed, Doctor? Is that your line? 
DEHNER: I heard that's more your specialty, Commander, line included. 
MITCHELL: (to Kelso) Walking freezer unit. 
SPOCK: Decoding memory banks. I'll try to interpolate. The Valiant had encountered a magnetic space storm and was being swept in this direction. 
KIRK: The old impulse engines weren't strong enough. 
SPOCK: Swept past this point, about a half light year out of the galaxy, they were thrown clear, turned, and headed back into the galaxy here. I'm not getting it all. The tapes are pretty badly burned. Sounds like the ship had encountered some unknown force. Now, orders, counter orders, repeated urgent requests for information from the ship's computer records for anything concerning ESP in human beings. 
KIRK: Extrasensory perception. Doctor Dehner, how are you on ESP? 
DEHNER: In tests I've taken, my ESP rated rather high. 
KIRK: I'm asking what you know about ESP. 
DEHNER: It is a fact that some people can sense future happenings, read the backs of playing cards and so on, but the esper capacity is always quite limited. 
SPOCK: Severe damage. Seven crewmen dead. No, make that six. One crewman seemed to have recovered. That's when they became interested in extrasensory perception. More than interested, almost frantic about it. No, this must be garbled. I get something about destruct. I must have read it wrong. It sounded like the captain giving an order to destroy his own ship. 
KIRK: Comments? 
PIPER: The only fact we have for sure is that the S.S. Valiant was destroyed. 
KIRK: That's probably the best argument to continue the probe. Other vessels will be heading out here someday and they'll have to know what they'll be facing. We're leaving the galaxy, Mister Mitchell. Ahead, warp factor one. 
SPOCK: Force field of some kind. 
MITCHELL: We're coming up on it fast. 
SPOCK: Sensor beam on. 
KELSO: Sensor beam on, sir. 
SPOCK: Deflectors full intensity. 
KELSO: Deflectors full intensity. 
SPOCK: Deflectors say there's something there, sensors say there isn't. Density negative. Radiation negative. Energy negative. 
KELSO: Whatever it is, contact in twelve seconds. 
KIRK: Gravitation on automatic. (consoles blow up) Emergency stations. All decks on fire alert. Neutralise controls. Kelso, put it on manual. Any radiation? Anything? 
SPOCK: Negative! 
KIRK: Helmsmen, take us out of here. (Dehner gets hit by an electric charge, then Mitchell) Helmsmen! (Kirk takes controls) Lateral power! (Spock takes over, Enterprise veers away) Take damage reports. 
SPOCK: Damage control reports, all stations! 
CREWMAN [OC]: Gravity control switching to batteries. 
DEHNER: Something hit me, like an electrical charge. 
PIPER: He's alive. Appears to be in shock. 
CREWMAN [OC]: Engineering deck three, can you give damage report? 
CREWMAN 2 [OC]: Sensor beams. Full power on the deflectors. 
SPOCK: Main engines are out, sir. We're on emergency power cells. Casualties, nine dead. 
CREWMAN [OC]: Gravity is down to point eight. 
CREWMAN 2 [OC]: All decks, this is Bridge Engineering. Due to emergency conditions. 
KIRK: Gary. Gary, are you all right? 
MITCHELL: I'm a little weak for some reason, Jim, but I feel all right now. (opens eyes, they're glowing)

Captain's log, Star date 1312.9. Ship's condition, heading back on impulse power only. Main engines burned out. The ship's space warp ability gone. Earth bases which were only days away are now years in the distance. Our overriding question now is what destroyed the Valiant? They lived through the barrier, just as we have. What happened to them after that?

[Bridge]

DEHNER: Autopsy report, sir. Each case showed damage to the body's neural circuit. An area of the brain was burned out. 
KIRK: And you, are you feeling all right? 
DEHNER: Yes. Mitchell, too, except for his eyes. We're trying to find a reason for that now, and why, out of our whole crew, only certain people were affected. 
SPOCK: I think we've found that answer, Doctor. 
KIRK: You mentioned that tests show you have a high degree of extrasensory perception. So do the records of the others. Gary Mitchell has the highest esper rating of all. 
DEHNER: lf you're suggesting there's anything dangerous 
SPOCK: Before the Valiant was destroyed, its captain was frantically searching for ESP information on his crew. 
DEHNER: Espers are simply people with flashes of insight. 
SPOCK: Are there not also those who seem to see through solid objects, cause fires to start spontaneously? 
DEHNER: There's nothing about it that could possibly make a person dangerous. 
SPOCK: Doctor Dehner is speaking of normal ESP power. 
DEHNER: Perhaps you know of another kind? 
KIRK: Do we know for sure, Doctor, that there isn't another kind?

[Sickbay]

MITCHELL: (without looking) Hello, Jim. Hey, you look worried. 
KIRK: I've been worried about you ever since that night on Deneb IV. 
MITCHELL: Yeah, she was nova, that one. Not nearly as many after-effects this time, except for the eyes. They kind of stare back at me when I'm shaving. 
KIRK: Do you feel any different? 
MITCHELL: In a way, I feel better than I've ever felt before in my life. It actually seems to have done me some good. 
KIRK: How? 
MITCHELL: Well, I'm getting a chance to read some of that longhair stuff you like. Hey man, I remember you back at the academy. A stack of books with legs. The first thing I ever heard from upperclassmen was, Watch out for Lieutenant Kirk. In his class, you either think or sink. 
KIRK: I wasn't that bad, was I? 
MITCHELL: If I hadn't aimed that little blonde lab technician at you 
KIRK: You what? You planned that? 
MITCHELL: Well, you wanted me to think, didn't you? I outlined her whole campaign for her. 
KIRK: I almost married her! 
MITCHELL: You better be good to me. I'm getting even better ideas here. 
KIRK: You? Spinoza? 
MITCHELL: Once you get into him, he's rather simple though. Childish, almost. I don't agree with him at all. 
KIRK: Go on. 
MITCHELL: I'm trying to tell you I feel fine. When do I go back on duty? 
KIRK: I'm going to ask Doctor Dehner to keep you under observation for a while. 
MITCHELL: With almost a hundred women onboard, you can do better than that, friend Captain. 
KIRK: Consider it a challenge. 
MITCHELL: That doesn't seem very friendly. Didn't I say you'd better be good to me?

[Bridge]

SPOCK: He's reading even faster now than just a few moments ago. Is that Gary Mitchell, the one you used to know? 
KIRK: Put a twenty four hour watch on the Sickbay. Fullest possible range of examinations and tests.

[Sickbay]

PIPER: Perfect, perfect. I've never had a patient like you, Gary. Even the healthiest are generally off on some reading. leaves) 
DEHNER: I know you don't particularly like me, Mister Mitchell, but since I am assigned here, can we make the best of it? 
MITCHELL: I've got nothing against you, Doctor. 
DEHNER: Nor against the walking freezer unit? 
MITCHELL: Well, I, sorry about that. 
DEHNER: Women professionals do tend to overcompensate. Now let's talk about you. How do you feel? 
MITCHELL: You know, everybody, everybody seems worried that I don't have some kind of fever or something. Maybe if we could just change these dials (sends them soaring). Now back to normal, I think. 
DEHNER: How did you do that? 
MITCHELL: I'm not sure, I, I just thought of making it happen, and it does. It's, hey, er hey watch this, Doc. 
(indicators plummet, Mitchell collapses) 
DEHNER: Stop it. Stop it! You were dead for almost twenty two seconds. There were no readings at all. 
MITCHELL: Yeah. Oh, boy. You, you know, Doc, there have been other things too, like going halfway through the ship's library in hardly a day. Yeah. Oh, what's happening to me? 
DEHNER: Do you remember everything you read that quickly? 
MITCHELL: Yeah. 
DEHNER: On any tape? 
MITCHELL: Sure. Yeah. 
DEHNER: Try this one. 
MITCHELL: Yeah. 
DEHNER: Page three eighty seven. 
MITCHELL: My love has wings. Slender, feathered things with grace in upswept curve and tapered tip. The Nightingale Woman, written by Phineas Tarbolde on the Canopius planet back in 1996. It's funny you picked that one, Doctor. 
DEHNER: Why? 
MITCHELL: That's one of the most passionate love sonnets of the past couple of centuries. How do you feel, Doctor? 
DEHNER: What? 
MITCHELL: How do you feel? 
DEHNER: I just fell. Nothing happened. 
MITCHELL No? Are you sure? Are you sure? 
KELSO: Er, I was on my coffee break. I thought I'd check up on 
MITCHELL Yeah, that's okay Lee, come on in. Don't let the light in my eyes bother you, pal. It's all for our, our good-looking lady doctor here. 
KELSO: Yeah. Sure. 
MITCHELL: So, er, so, how go the repairs? 
KELSO: Well, the main engines are gone, unless we can find some way to re-energise them. 
MITCHELL: You'd better check the starboard impulse packs. Those points have about decayed to lead. 
KELSO: Oh, yeah, sure, Mitch. 
MITCHELL: I'm not joking, Lee! You activate those packs, and you'll blow the whole impulse deck. 
KELSO: I'll, er, I'll get on it right away. I just wanted to stop by and make sure you were okay. See you later. (leaves) 
MITCHELL: He's a fool. A fool. He'd seen those points and he hadn't noticed their condition. 
DEHNER: How do you know? 
MITCHELL: The image of what he'd seen was still in his mind.

[Briefing room]

KELSO: Well, it didn't make any sense that he'd know, but naturally, I checked out the circuit anyway. I don't know how, but he was right. This point is burned out exactly the way he described it. 
DEHNER: Sorry I'm late. I became so interested in observing Gary, Mister Mitchell. 
SPOCK: Our subject is not Gary Mitchell. Our concern is, rather, what he is mutating into. 
DEHNER: I know those from your planet aren't suppose to have feelings like we do, Mister Spock, but to talk that way about a man you've worked next to for years is worse than 
KIRK: That's enough, Doctor. 
DEHNER: I don't think so. I understand you least of all. Gary told me that you've been friends since he joined the service, that you asked for him aboard your first command. 
KIRK: It is my duty, whether pleasant or unpleasant, to listen to the reports, observations, even speculations, on any subject that might affect the safety of this vessel, and it's my science officer's duty to see I'm provided with that. Go ahead, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Have you noted evidence of unusual powers? 
DEHNER: He can control certain autonomic reflexes. He reads very fast, retains more than most of us might consider usual. 
KIRK: Mister Scott, would you repeat what you just told us? 
SCOTT: About an hour ago, the Bridge controls started going crazy. Levers shifting by themselves, buttons being pushed, instrument readings changing. 
SPOCK: And on my monitor screen I could see Mitchell smiling each time it happened, as if this ship and crew were almost a toy for his amusement. 
KIRK: Are they right, Doctor? Has he shown abilities of such magnitude? 
DEHNER: I saw some such indications. 
KIRK: And you didn't think it worth mentioning? 
DEHNER: No one's been hurt, have they? Don't you understand? A mutated superior man could also be a wonderful thing. The forerunner of a new and better kind of human being. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu. 
SULU: If you want the mathematics of this, Mitchell's ability is increasing geometrically. That is, like having a penny, doubling it every day. In a month, you'll be a millionaire. 
SPOCK: In less time than that, he will have attained powers we can't understand and can't cope with. Soon we'll be not only useless to him, but actually an annoyance. 
KIRK: There'll be no discussion of this with the crew. Thank you. (everyone else leaves)
SPOCK: We'll never reach an Earth base with him aboard, Jim. You heard the mathematics of it. In a month he'll have as much in common with us as we'd have with a ship full of white mice. 
KIRK: I need a recommendation, Spock, not vague warnings. 
SPOCK: Recommendation one. There's a planet a few light days away from here. Delta Vega. It has a lithium cracking station. We may be able to adapt some of its power packs to our engines. 
KIRK: And if we can't? We'll be trapped in orbit there. We haven't enough power to blast back out. 
SPOCK: It is the only possible way to get Mitchell off this ship. 
KIRK: If you mean strand Mitchell there, I won't do it. That station is fully automated. There's not a soul on the whole planet. Even the ore ships call only once every twenty years. 
SPOCK: Then you have one other choice. Kill Mitchell while you still can. 
KIRK: Get out of here. 
SPOCK: It is your only other choice, assuming you make it while you still have time. 
KIRK: Will you try for one moment to feel? At least act like you've got a heart. We're talking about Gary. 
SPOCK: The captain of the Valiant probably felt the same way, and he waited too long to make his decision. I think we've both guessed that. 
KIRK: Set course for Delta Vega.

Star date 1313.1. We're now approaching Delta Vega. Course set for a standard orbit. This planet, completely uninhabited, is slightly smaller than Earth. Desolate, but rich in crystal and minerals. Kelso's task, transport down with a repair party, try to regenerate the main engines, save the ship. Our task, transport down a man I've known for fifteen years, and if we're successful, maroon him there.

[Sickbay]

MITCHELL: I'm thirsty. (cup slides under tap, is filled, then flies through the air to his hand) It's like a man who has been blind all of his life, suddenly being given sight. Sometimes I feel there's nothing I couldn't do, in time. Some people think that makes me a monster, don't they Jim. 
KIRK: Are you reading all our thoughts, Gary? 
MITCHELL: I can sense mainly worry in you, Jim. Safety of your ship. 
KIRK: What would you do in my place? 
MITCHELL: Probably just what Mister Spock is thinking now. Kill me while you can. (zaps Kirk and Spock with electric bolts) 
DEHNER: Stop it, Gary! 
MITCHELL: I also know we're orbiting Delta Vega, Jim. I can't let you force me down there. I may not want to leave this ship, not yet. I may want another place. I'm not sure yet just what kind of a world I can use. 
DEHNER: Use? 
MITCHELL: I don't understand it all yet, but if I keep growing, getting stronger, why, the things I could do, like, like maybe a god could do. (Kirk knocks him out)
KIRK: I want him unconscious for a while. (Dehner sedates him)

[Transporter room]

MITCHELL: You fools! Soon I'll squash you like insects. (Piper re-sedates him) 
KIRK: Energise.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Can you do it, Lee? 
KELSO: Maybe, if we can bypass the fuel bins without blowing ourselves up. 
KIRK: Take him. 
DEHNER: There's not a soul on this planet but us?
KIRK: Nobody but us chickens, Doctor.

[Delta Vega Control room]

ALDEN: I think I've got the 203-R set, Lee.
KELSO: Good, Alden. Transport it up with you, will you?
ALDEN: Okay. 
KIRK: The fuel bins, Lee. Could they be detonated from here?
KELSO: A destruct switch? I guess I could wire one up right there.
KIRK: Do it.
SPOCK: He's regaining consciousness.

[Delta Vega Brig]

KIRK: Doctor Piper. I want only one medical officer here at any one time. The other will monitor him on the dispensary screen. 
DEHNER: I'd like to stay now, try to talk to him. 
MITCHELL: My friend James Kirk. remember those rodent things on Dimorus? The poisoned darts they threw? I took one meant for you. 
KIRK: And almost died. I remember. 
MITCHELL: So why be afraid of me now? 
KIRK: You've been testing your ability to take over the Enterprise. In the transporter room, you said something about us seeming like insects by comparison, squashing us if we got in your way. 
MITCHELL: I was drugged then. 
KIRK: Yes. In the Sickbay, you said if you were in my place, you'd kill a mutant like yourself. 
MITCHELL: Why don't you kill me then? Mister Spock is right and you're a fool if you can't see it. 
DEHNER: You don't mean that, Gary. 
MITCHELL: Man cannot survive if a race of true espers is born. In time you'll understand that. (tests the forcefield) 
KIRK: Gary. Gary, don't! 
MITCHELL: Jim. 
KIRK: His eyes went back to normal. 
SPOCK: Fighting the force field drained his strength, for a while at least. He could be handled now. 
MITCHELL: I'll just keep getting stronger. You know that, don't you.

[Bridge]

SCOTT: (having put new panel in a bridge station) It fits like a glove, Captain.

[Delta Vega Control room]

SCOTT [OC]: Oh, did Mister Spock get the phaser rifle we sent down? 
KIRK: I didn't order any (Spock enters with rifle) Affirmative. Landing party out. 
SPOCK: He tried to get through the force field again. His eyes changed back faster. He didn't become as weak. 
KIRK: Doctor Dehner feels he isn't that dangerous. What makes you right and a trained psychiatrist wrong? 
SPOCK: Because she feels. I don't. All I know is logic. In my opinion we'll be lucky if we can repair this ship and get away in time. 
KELSO: Direct to the power bins. From here you could blow up this whole valley. 
KIRK: If Mitchell gets out, at your discretion, Lee, if sitting here, you think you're the last chance, I want you to hit that button.

Captain's log, Star date 1313.3. Note commendations on Lieutenant Kelso and the engineering staff. In orbit above us, the engines of the Enterprise are almost fully regenerated. Balance of the landing party is being transported back up. Mitchell, whatever he's become, keeps changing, growing stronger by the minute.

[Delta Vega Brig]

DEHNER: He's been like that for hours now. 
KIRK: Have Doctor Piper meet us in the control room with Kelso. We'll all transport up together. 
SPOCK: If he should try to stop us 
KIRK: Kelso will be on the destruct button until the last minute. I think he knows that. 
DEHNER: I'm staying behind with him.

[Delta Vega Control room]

KELSO: Fission chamber three checks out. The station seems to be running fine. 
SCOTT [OC]: You're a talented thief, Kelso. Everything you sent up seems to be fitting in place. 
KELSO: I'm kind of proud of the job we've done. We're going to be ready to transport up (a cable loops over his neck from behind and throttles him)

[Delta Vega Brig]

KIRK: You're leaving with the ship, Doctor. 
DEHNER: He is not evil. 
KIRK: I gave you an order, Doctor. 
MITCHELL: You should have killed me while you could, James. Command and compassion is a fool's mixture. (zaps Kirk and Spock then waves away the forcefield. He leads Dehner into his cell and we see in the mirror her eyes are like his now)

PIPER: It hit me, too, whatever it was. Kelso is dead, strangled. At least Spock's alive. 
KIRK: Doctor Dehner? 
PIPER: She went with Mitchell. 
KIRK: Don't give him a pill until after I'm gone. It's my fault Mitchell got as far as he did. Did you see their direction? 
PIPER: Yes, there was some morning light. They were headed across the valley, to the left of the pointed peaks. There's flatlands beyond. 
KIRK: When Mister Spock recovers, you'll both transport up immediately to the Enterprise. 
PIPER: But Captain 
KIRK: If you have not received a signal from me within twelve hours, you'll proceed at maximum warp to the nearest Earth base with my recommendation that this entire planet be subjected to a lethal concentration of neutron radiation. No protest on this, Mark. That's an order.

[Planet surface]

DEHNER: It would take almost a miracle to survive here. 
MITCHELL: Then I shall make one. Behold. (creates and oasis with flowers and a spring) You'll soon share this feeling, Elizabeth. To be like God, to have the power to make the world anything you want it to be. 
DEHNER: What's wrong? 
MITCHELL: A visitor. A very foolish man. You'll enjoy being a god, Elizabeth. Blasphemy? No. Let there be food. Kaferian apples. Whenever we visited that planet, I always favoured these. Can you hear me, James? You cannot see me. I'm not there. You follow the right path, James. You'll come to me soon. 
DEHNER: I can see him in my mind, too. 
MITCHELL: Go to him, Elizabeth, talk to him. Now that you're changing I want you to see just how unimportant they are.

DEHNER: Yes, it just took a little longer for it to happen to me. 
KIRK: You must help me Before it goes too far. 
DEHNER: What he's doing is right for him and me. 
KIRK: And for humanity? You're still human 
DEHNER: No, I 
KIRK: At least partly, you are, or you wouldn't be here talking to me. 
DEHNER: Earth is really unimportant. Before long, we'll be where it would have taken mankind millions of years of learning to reach. 
KIRK: What will Mitchell learn in getting there? Will he know what to do with his power? Will he acquire the wisdom? 
DEHNER: Please go back while you still can. 
KIRK: Did you hear him joke about compassion? Above all else, a god needs compassion. Mitchell! Elizabeth. 
DEHNER: What do you know about gods? 
KIRK: Then let's talk about humans, about our frailties. As powerful as he gets, he'll have all that inside him. 
DEHNER: Go back. 
KIRK: You were a psychiatrist once. You know the ugly, savage things we all keep buried, that none of us dare expose. But he'll dare. Who's to stop him? He doesn't need to care. Be a psychiatrist for one minute longer. What do you see happening to him? What's your prognosis, Doctor? 
DEHNER: He's coming. 
KIRK: Then watch him. Hang on to being a human for one minute longer. 
MITCHELL: I'm disappointed in you, Elizabeth. (phaser rifle has no effect on him) I've been contemplating the death of an old friend. He deserves a decent burial, at least. (a grave appears in the rock, with a tombstone engraved James R Kirk. A massive boulder on the cliff above is loosened) 
DEHNER: Stop it, Gary. 
MITCHELL: Morals are for men, not gods. 
KIRK: A god, but still driven by human frailty. Do you like what you see? 
MITCHELL: Time to pray, Captain. Pray to me. 
KIRK: To you? Not to both of you? 
MITCHELL: Pray that you die easily. 
KIRK: There'll only be one of you in the end. One jealous god. if all this makes a god, or is it making you something else? 
MITCHELL: Your last chance, Kirk. 
KIRK: Do you like what you see? Absolute power corrupting absolutely. (Dehner zaps Mitchell, he returns fire, she continues and his eyes return to normal)
DEHNER: Hurry. You haven't much time. (the two men punch and wrestle until Kirk raises a rock over his head)
KIRK: Gary, forgive me. (Mitchell's eyes glow again)
MITCHELL: For a moment, James, but your moment is fading. (they both fall into the grave, but Kirk leaps out first, grabs the rifle and brings the boulder down to entomb Mitchell)
DEHNER: I'm sorry. You can't know what it's like to be almost a god. (dies) 
KIRK: Enterprise from Captain Kirk, come in.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Captain's log, Star date 1313.8. Add to official losses, Doctor Elizabeth Dehner. Be it noted she gave her life in performance of her duty. Lieutenant Commander Gary Mitchell, same notation. I want his service record to end that way. He didn't ask for what happened to him. 
SPOCK: I felt for him, too. 
KIRK: I believe there's some hope for you after all, Mister Spock.

SPOCK: Check out the life-support systems. 
TORMOLEN: Right, sir. All life systems were off, sir.
SPOCK: Someone strangled this woman.
TORMOLEN The other four are back there.
SPOCK: Dead?
TORMOLEN: Right, sir.
SPOCK: Engineer at his post?
TORMOLEN He's frozen there like he didn't care.
SPOCK: The rest?
TORMOLEN: Well, better look for yourself, Mister Spock. One man was taking a shower fully clothed. (they split up, he takes off his glove to scratch his nose then puts it on the console. Something orange jumps onto his skin. Feeling the cold he puts the glove back on)
SPOCK: Be certain we expose ourselves to nothing. Spock here. Do you read, Enterprise? 
KIRK [OC]: Kirk, affirmative.
SPOCK: All station personnel are dead.
KIRK [OC]: What caused it?
SPOCK: Unknown, Captain. It's like nothing we've dealt with before.

Captain's Log: Stardate 1704.2. The science party we were to have picked up has been found dead. Life support systems had been turned off. Station personnel, frozen to death. Conditions highly unusual. Meanwhile, we remain in orbit to complete our mission, close scientific measurement of the break-up of this planet.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: You received my signal, Mister Scott.
SCOTT: Yes, sir. Decontaminate.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Captain here.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Spock and Tormolen aboard, sir.

[Bridge]

SCOTT [OC]: We're holding them in the chamber for decontamination.
KIRK: Better have Medicine look them over too. Tell Mister Spock I'll meet him there in ten minutes. Kirk out.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: You're fine, Joe. Up and out of there. Mister Spock? Your pulse is two hundred and forty two, your blood pressure is practically nonexistent, assuming you call that green stuff in your veins blood.
SPOCK: The readings are perfectly normal for me, Doctor, thank you, and as for my anatomy being different from yours, I am delighted. Captain.
KIRK: How are they?
MCCOY: They're fine, Jim. 
TORMOLEN: Terrible, Captain. It was terrible. They were just sitting, like they didn't care. Whatever was happening, they didn't care. I keep wondering
KIRK: You keep wondering if man was meant to be out here. You keep wondering, you keep signing on. Any guesses, Mister Spock? Any idea of what happened down there?
SPOCK: I wish I could say, Captain. The circumstances were quite bizarre, however our record tapes may show us something.
TORMOLEN: Six dead. Six people dead.
KIRK: You'd better get some rest.
TORMOLEN: Yes, sir.
KIRK: Set up those tapes, Mister Spock. We'll see if the answers are there. (leaves with Spock)
CHAPEL: The lab status report, Doctor.
MCCOY: Oh, thank you, Christine.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: Next tape, please.
RAND: Spectro-analysis tape, sir.
SPOCK: Thank you.
KIRK: Almost as though they were irrational, drugged. An engineer sitting there, apparently oblivious to everything. A woman strangled. A crewman with a phaser pistol in his hand.
SPOCK: He'd used the computer room as if it were an amusement gallery.
KIRK: And a fully clothed man frozen to death in a shower. If the image wasn't so ugly, it would be laughable. Not even a theory, gentlemen?
MCCOY: Definitely not drugs or intoxication. The bio-analysis on the tapes prove that conclusively.
SPOCK: It could be some form of space madness we've never heard of, but it would have to be caused by something. Our spectro-readings showed no contamination, no unusual elements present.
SCOTT: Or at least none your tricorders could register.
SPOCK: Instruments register only those things they're designed to register. Space still contains infinite unknowns.
KIRK: Earth Science needs the closest possible measurement of the breakup of this planet. To do this, we need the Enterprise in a critically tight orbit. Question. Could what happened down there to those people create any unusual danger to this vessel and crew?
SPOCK: We will need top efficiency, Captain. It'll be a tricky orbit. When the planet begins to go, there may be drastic changes in gravity, mass, magnetic field.
KIRK: The purpose of a briefing, gentlemen, is to get me answers based on your abilities and experience. In a critical orbit, there's no time for surprise. 
SCOTT: Unless you people on the Bridge start taking showers with your clothes on, my engines can pull us out of anything. We'll be warping out of orbit within a half second of getting your command.
UHURA [OC]: Bridge to Captain.
KIRK: Kirk here.
UHURA [OC]: Scanners report sudden four degree shift in planet magnetic field. A change in mass also, sir.
SPOCK: It's beginning. Unusually rapid shifts.
KIRK: On our way, Lieutenant. I'll hold you to that half second, Scotty.

[Rec room]

SULU: Foil. It's a rapier. A thin sword.
RILEY: All right. So what do you do with it?
SULU: What do you mean, what do you do with it?
RILEY: Self-defence? Mayhem? Shish kebab?
SULU: You practice.
RILEY: For what?
SULU: Hi, Joey.
RILEY: Last week it was botany he was trying to get me interested in. I was supposed to be collecting leaves, plant specimens.
SULU: Your attitude is all wrong. Fencing tones the muscle, sharpens the eye, improves the posture. You tell him, Joey. Explain to him. Hey, Joey. You feeling all right?
TORMOLEN: Get off me! You don't rank me and you don't have pointed ears, so just get off my neck!
SULU: What's with him?
TORMOLEN: Nothing!
UHURA [OC]: Attention. Engine room on standby alert. All duty personnel to the Bridge. Acknowledge.
SULU: You sure you're all right now, Joe? We've got to leave.
TORMOLEN: We're all a bunch of hypocrites. Sticking our noses into something that we've got no business. What are we doing out here, anyway?
SULU: Take it easy, Joe.
TORMOLEN: We bring pain and trouble with us, leave men and women stuck out on freezing planets until they die. What are we doing out here in space? Good? What good? We're polluting it, destroying it. We've got no business being out here. No business.
RILEY: Take it easy, Joe.
SULU: Now calm down.
TORMOLEN: If a man was supposed to fly, he'd have wings. If he was supposed to be out in space, he wouldn't need air to breathe, wouldn't need life-support systems to keep him from freezing to death.
RILEY: Hey, Joey, put the knife down, huh?
SULU: You're all steamed up, Joe.
TORMOLEN: We don't belong here. It's not ours. Not ours. Destroying and watching. We don't belong. I don't belong. Six people died down there. Why do I deserve to live?
SULU: What are you doing, Joe?
RILEY: Hey, Joey, put the knife down. (grabs his arm) Don't be a fool.
TORMOLEN: Let go!
RILEY: You're just getting in a sweat about (three men struggle) Let me have the knife!
SULU: Joey, don't be a fool.
TORMOLEN: Let me go.
RILEY: Joey, give me the knife. (they fall to the floor, Tormolen gets stabbed in the stomach) Emergency! Rec room, area three nine. We need medics!

Captain's Log, supplemental. Our orbit tightening. Our need for efficiency, critical. But unknown to us, a totally new and unusual disease has been brought aboard.

[Bridge]

RILEY: Relative gravity increasing, sir.
KIRK: Compensate, Mister Riley.
RILEY: Yes, sir.
SULU: Magnetic field continuing to shift, sir. Planet continuing to shrink in mass.
KIRK: Mister Spock?
SPOCK: All scanning stations manned, all recorders functioning, Captain.
RILEY: Orbit steady now, sir.
SPOCK: Obviously, this planet is condensing more rapidly than expected. A valuable study. We may be seeing Earth's distant future. Before its sun went dark, this planet was remarkably similar to yours.
SULU: Helm answering nicely, Captain.
KIRK: Good.
UHURA: Communications status, Captain.
KIRK: Tormolen's record?
SPOCK: Psychiatric file, personality quotients. 
KIRK: Was he trying to kill himself?
SPOCK: It's doubtful he meant to. He was confused, self-tortured.
KIRK: Doesn't sound like the man I know.
SPOCK: His capacity for self-doubt has always been rather high. What puzzles me is what brought it to the surface with so much force.

[Sickbay]

CHAPEL: His breathing rate is dropping, Doctor.
MCCOY: Compensate with the respirator. Stand by to close. Closing.

[Bridge]

KIRK: What is it?
SULU: Relative gravity increase, sir. Like the planet reached out and yanked at us.
KIRK: Compensate. (adjusts Riley's controls) Compensate.
RILEY: Orbit steady now, sir. May be a little nervous, I guess.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: This shouldn't be happening. This man should be getting stronger. You sure the respirator's functioning properly? 
CHAPEL: Yes, Doctor.
MCCOY: Why is this man dying? Hypo.
CHAPEL: He's dead, Doctor.
MCCOY: The wounds were not that severe.

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: This is McCoy. Captain Kirk to Sickbay.
KIRK: Uhura, monitor communications. Tell McCoy I'll be there when I can.
UHURA: Yes, sir.
SPOCK: Planet breakup is imminent, Captain. Shrinking in size at an increasing rate. As the planet continues to shrink in size, its surface moves away from us. 
KIRK: Forcing us to spiral down to maintain the same distance from it.
SPOCK: Exactly. We must be prepared to respond instantly to any sudden change.
KIRK: Engine room from Bridge.
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here, Captain.
KIRK: Tie into the helm, Scotty. If we should call for power, we'll want it fast.
SCOTT [OC]: No problem, sir. You'll have it.
SPOCK: Rate of compaction seems constant.
KIRK: Then I'll go see what the good doctor wants. Keep me informed of any change, Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Acknowledged.
SULU: Don't know if it's this planet or what happened with Joe. I'm sweating like a bridegroom.
RILEY: Yeah, me too.
SULU: Hey, why don't you come down to the gym with me, Kevin m'lad?
RILEY: Now?
SULU: Why not? Light workout will take the edge off.
RILEY: Sulu, what about. Hey, Sulu, don't be a fool!

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Intestinal damage wasn't that severe. I got to him in plenty of time. That man should still be alive. The only reason he died, Jim, is he didn't want to live. He gave up.
KIRK: That's a supposition, Doctor, not a fact.
MCCOY: Well, that may be. Maybe. I've lost patients before, but not like that. Not Joe's kind. That kind of man doesn't give up.
KIRK: Coincidence? Maybe. 
MCCOY: You mean that Joe was down on the planet surface and you're gonna ask me if it's connected.
KIRK: That's exactly what I was going to ask.
MCCOY: Jim, he was decontaminated. He's been medically checked. We've run every test we know for everything we know.
KIRK: That's not good enough.
MCCOY: Well, we're doing everything that's possible.
KIRK: Bones, I want the impossible checked out too.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Why isn't Mister Sulu at this station?
RILEY: Magnetic pull compensated for, sir. Orbit steady.
SPOCK: Take over here, Rand. (a male, not Janice)
RAND: Yes, sir.
SPOCK: You haven't answered my question. Where is Mister Sulu?
RILEY: Have no fear, O'Riley's here. One Irishman is worth ten thousand of you
SPOCK: You're relieved, Mister Riley. Lieutenant Uhura, take over this station.
UHURA: Yes, sir.
RILEY: Now that's what I like. Let the women work too. Universal suffrage.
SPOCK: Report to Sickbay, Mister Riley.
RILEY: Sickbay? Exactly where I was heading, sir.
SPOCK: Security. Mister Riley is headed for Sickbay. See to it he arrives. Captain Kirk to the Bridge.

[Sickbay]

RILEY: Where's Joe?
CHAPEL: Well.
RILEY: He died, didn't he.
CHAPEL: Yes.
RILEY: You know something? You have such lovely eyes, pretty lady. (touches her face)
CHAPEL: I know he was a friend of yours. This must be a terrible shock.
RILEY: You know what Joe's mistake was? He wasn't born an Irishman.

[Corridor]

SULU: (brandishing foil) Richelieu, beware! Stand. No farther. No escape for you. You either leave this bois bloodied, or with my blood on your swords. Cowards!

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Lieutenant Brent, relieve Miss Uhura.
BRENT: Yes, sir.
KIRK: What were their symptoms?
SPOCK: Nonviolent at this stage. Slightly disoriented. Riley seemed rather pleased with himself, as if he were
KIRK: Irrational, or drugged.
SPOCK: Precisely.
KIRK: Security, Lieutenant Uhura.
UHURA: Yes, sir.
KIRK: Both Sulu and Riley, locate and confine. I want every crewman who comes in contact with them medically checked.
UHURA: Sir, level two, corridor three reports a disturbance. Mister Sulu chasing crewmen with a sword.
KIRK: Put Security on it.
SPOCK: Fascinating. A pattern is developing. First, Tormolen. Hidden personality traits being forced to the surface. Then Riley, who fancies himself a descendant of Irish kings, and now Sulu, who is at heart a swashbuckler out of your 18th century.
KIRK: Present condition of Psi 2000.
SPOCK: Gravity pull increasing. We've shifted to two percent and should stabilise our position.
KIRK: Helmsman, stabilise position.
BRENT: Helm is not answering to control.
KIRK: Warp us out of here.
BRENT: No response from engines, sir.
KIRK: Impulse power then. Blast us out of this orbit.
BRENT: Impulse engines also dead, sir.
SPOCK: Engine room, we need power!
KIRK: Mister Scott, acknowledge. Our controls are dead. Take her.
SULU: Richelieu, at last.
KIRK: Sulu, put that (discovers that the point is sharp) put that thing away.
SULU: For honour, Queen, and France! (lunges)
UHURA: Sulu.
SULU: Ah.
UHURA: Sulu, give me that.
SULU: I'll protect you, fair maiden.
UHURA: Sorry, neither.
SULU: Foul Richelieu. (distracted by Uhura's escape, Kirk is able to grab Sulu and Spock does a neck-pinch)
KIRK: I'd like you to teach me that sometime.
SPOCK: Take D'Artagnon here to Sickbay.
KIRK: Scotty, we need power. Engine room, acknowledge!
RILEY [OC]: You rang, sir?
KIRK: Who's this?

[Engineering]

RILEY: This is Captain Kevin Thomas Riley of the starship Enterprise.

[Bridge]

RILEY [OC]: And who is this?
KIRK: This is Captain Kirk. Get out of the engine room, navigator. Where's Mister Scott?
RILEY [OC]: I've relieved Mister Scott of his duties. Now, attention, cooks. This is your captain speaking. I would like double portions of ice cream for the entire crew.
KIRK: Clear that tube, will you?
UHURA: Yes, sir.
RILEY [OC]: And now, your captain will render an ancient Irish favourite. (sings) I'll take you home again Kathleen
SPOCK: Captain. At our present rate of descent, we have less than twenty minutes before we enter planet atmosphere.
KIRK: And burn up. I know, Mister Spock.
RILEY [OC]: Wild and wide to where your heart

Captain's Log, stardate 1704.4. Ship out of control, spiraling down towards planet Psi 2000. We have nineteen minutes of life left without engine power or helm control.

[Corridor outside Engineering]

KIRK: How did Riley get in there?
SCOTT: He ran in, said you wanted us on the Bridge.
KIRK: He's cut off both helm and power.
SCOTT: And he shut the door behind us and locked off the mechanism.
KIRK: Can't you get to the auxiliary?
SCOTT: I can't. He's hooked everything through the main panel in there. Get up to my office and pull the plans for this bulkhead. The only way to get that door open is to cut through these wall circuits here.

[Engineering]

RILEY: (singing) The roses all have left your cheeks. I've watched them fade away and die

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Status reports, all sections.
UHURA: Mister Spock, a fight in the aft wardroom. Security reports incidents among the crewmen are increasing.
SPOCK: Go to Alert Baker two. Seal off main sections.
UHURA: All decks, alert system B two. Repeat, go to alert condition Baker two. Seal off all main sections. Stand by.
SPOCK: We're going to seal off, Captain, if we can minimise the spread of whatever this is.
KIRK: Continue the alert, Lieutenant.
UHURA: I can't, sir. He's cut off the alert channels.

[Engineering]

RILEY: Lieutenant Uhura,

[Bridge]

RILEY [OC]: You've interrupted my song. I'm sorry, but there'll be no ice cream for you tonight.
KIRK: Cut him off.
UHURA: I can't, sir. There's no way to do it.
RILEY [OC]: Attention, crew. This is Captain Riley. There will be a formal dance in the bowling alley at nineteen hundred hours tonight.
SPOCK: No way, Captain. He controls the main power panels. He can override any channel from down there. Seventeen minutes left, sir. (ship is jolted severely)
MCCOY: Sickbay to Bridge.
KIRK: Can you tie me in to the Sickbay?

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: I'm getting you, Jim. Look, can you keep this beast level? I've got Sulu tranquillized and we're running tests on him.

[Bridge]

MCCOY [OC]: So far there's nothing unusual in his bloodstream. Body functions seem normal.
KIRK: Riley's the immediate problem, Doctor. Is there any way, anything you can do to snap him out of it?

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Negative, until I can get a little farther on these tests.

[Bridge]

RILEY [OC]: This is Captain Riley. Crew, I have some additional orders.

[Engineering]

RILEY: In the future, all female crew members will wear their hair loosely, about their shoulders.

[Bridge]

RILEY [OC]: And use restraint in putting on your makeup. Women, women should not look made up. And now, crew, I will render Kathleen one more time!
KIRK: Please, not again.

[Engineering]

RILEY: (singing) I'll take you home again, Kathleen (meanwhile, Scott is working in a Jefferies tube) I've watched them fade away and die.

[Corridor]

SCOTT: I've set the jumpers up there. Stand by 'til I give you a signal.

[Engineering]

RILEY: And tears bedim your loving eyes. Oh,

[Corridor outside Engineering]

RILEY [OC]: I will take you home Kathleen.
SCOTT: Engineering to Bridge. Try your helm. You'll have enough power to keep her stabilised. Here, let's have a look at that.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Sixteen minutes left, Captain. We've stabilised, but still spiraling down.
UHURA: Emergency signal, Captain. Both decks four and five. Fights and disorders.
KIRK: Get me Sickbay.
UHURA: I have no intercom for Sickbay. He keeps switching channels on me.
KIRK: See what you can do to help Doctor McCoy. Better check Scotty first. Move him faster. He's got to get through that bulkhead.

[Corridor] SPOCK: Crewman, report to the lab!
MOODY: (singing) I'll take you home again Janice 
SPOCK: What's going on?
RAND: Mister Spock, I'm trying to get to the Bridge and this crewman won't let me by.
SPOCK: Crewman, stand aside.
MOODY: Oh, yes, sir. I'll take you home again, Janice
RAND: Spock!

[Corridor outside Engineering]

SPOCK: Message from the captain.
SCOTT: Tell him I'm doing my best. If I cut through the wrong circuits
SPOCK: We have fourteen minutes left.
SCOTT: Even if we were under a full-scale attack I couldn't move any faster, not and maintain a safety factor.
SPOCK: At the rate you're proceeding, calculations show that you'll take a minute and a half more than we have left. You can't afford a safety factor.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Biopsy lab. Biopsy, where's my report? Biopsy, come in! Harrison, where's my report? I'm going to the lab.
CHAPEL: Sir?
MCCOY: Yes?
CHAPEL: The tranquillizer's wearing off.
MCCOY: Oh, good. I'll need him conscious now. Continue to examine him on circuits K one and three.
CHAPEL: Of course, Doctor.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Get him out of here.
RAND: I would have gotten here sooner, sir but Crewman Moody stopped me in the hallway.
KIRK: Take the helm.
RAND: Sir?
KIRK: Take the helm!
RAND: Yes, sir.
RILEY [OC]: Kathleen. And now, crew, one more time!
KIRK: At least try cutting him off!
UHURA: Sir, if I could cut him off, don't you think I
RILEY [OC]: I'll take you home again Kathleen 
UHURA: Yes, sir. I'll keep trying.
KIRK: Sorry.
RILEY [OC]: Across the ocean wild and wide 
KIRK: Scotty.
SCOTT [OC]: Engine room.
KIRK: We've got twelve minutes left. It'll take at least two or three of them to get the engines up to power now.
SCOTT [OC]: Then we'll make it, sir, if all goes right.
KIRK: Call me when you've cut through. I want to be there. Kirk out.

[Sickbay]

SPOCK: Nurse? Where is Doctor McCoy?
CHAPEL: He's gone to the lab.
SPOCK: Lab. Lab, respond please. Spock here. Lab!
CHAPEL: Mister Spock.
SPOCK: What is it, Nurse?
CHAPEL: Mister Spock, (takes his hand) the men from Vulcan treat their women strangely. At least, people say that, but you're part human too. I know you don't, you couldn't, hurt me, would you? I'm in love with you, Mister Spock. You, the human Mister Spock, the Vulcan Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Nurse, you should
CHAPEL: Christine, please. I see things, how honest you are. I know how you feel. You hide it, but you do have feeling. Oh, how we must hurt you, torture you.
SPOCK: I'm in control of my emotions.
CHAPEL: The others believe that. I don't. I love you. I don't know why, but I love you. I do love you just as you are. Oh, I love you.
SPOCK: I'm sorry.
UHURA [OC]: Captain is en route to Engineering, Mister Spock. Can you take the bridge? Acknowledge.
SPOCK: I am sorry.
CHAPEL: Christine.
SPOCK: Christine.
UHURA [OC]: Bridge to Sickbay. Is Mister Spock there?

[Corridor]

UHURA [OC]: Mister Spock, would you please acknowledge? (Spock is struggling to keep his control)

[Corridor outside Engineering]

RILEY [OC]: I will take you home Kathleen 
SCOTT: Almost ready, sir.
RILEY [OC]: To where your heart will feel no pain. When the fields are fresh and green. I'll take you to your home
SCOTT: - Ready, sir.
KIRK: (to Security) Follow me through. Put your phasers on stun. Don't fire unless he's armed. Go.

[Engineering]

RILEY: I'll take. No dance tonight.
KIRK: Get him out of here.

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: (close to tears) I'm in control of my emotions. Control of my emotions. I am an officer. An officer. My duty. My duty is, is. My duty is to, to. Too late. I'm sorry. To. Two, four, six. Six. Six times six.

[Engineering]

KIRK: Scotty, we haven't got much time left.
UHURA [OC]: Bridge to Captain.
KIRK: Kirk here.
UHURA [OC]: Entering planet's outer atmosphere, sir.
SCOTT: Captain.
KIRK: What is it?
SCOTT: He's turned the engines off. Completely cold. It will take thirty minutes to regenerate them.
UHURA [OC]: Ship's outer skin is beginning to heat, Captain. Orbit plot shows we have about eight minutes left.
KIRK: Scotty!
SCOTT: I can't change the laws of physics. I've got to have thirty minutes.

Captain's Log, supplemental. The Enterprise, spiraling down out of control. Ship's outer skin heating rapidly due to friction with planet atmosphere.

SCOTT: Maybe twenty two, twenty three minutes.
KIRK: Scotty, we've got six.
SCOTT: Captain, you can't mix matter and antimatter cold. We'd go up in the biggest explosion since
KIRK: We can balance our engines into a controlled implosion.
SCOTT: That's only a theory. It's never been done.
KIRK: Bridge, have you found Mister Spock yet?
SCOTT: If you wanted to chance odds of ten thousand to one, maybe, assuming we had a row of computers working weeks on the right formula.
UHURA: Mister Spock is not on the Bridge, Captain.

[Bridge]

SULU: (waking up screaming) I was on the Bridge. Hey Doc, what am I doing here?
MCCOY: McCoy to Bio. We've isolated it. Start preparing serum.
HARRISON [OC]: What, Doctor?
MCCOY: It's water. Somehow on this planet, water's changed to a complex chain of molecules.
HARRISON [OC]: What's that, Doctor?
MCCOY: That's how we missed it. It passed from man to man through perspiration. Once in the bloodstream, it acts like alcohol, depresses the centres of judgment, self-control. Now get someone to the lab. Tell them the serum works, and start preparing more.
SULU: Doc, will you let me out of here? I'm all right.
MCCOY: Release him.

[Briefing room]

SCOTT [OC]: Engineers, man your stations. Engine rooms, report. Cycling station, report. This will be an emergency restart of engines.
KIRK: Where have you been? What happened?
SPOCK: My mother. I could never tell her I loved her.
KIRK: We've got four minutes, maybe five.
SPOCK: An Earth woman, living on a planet where love, emotion, is bad taste.
KIRK: We've got to risk a full-power start. The engines were shut off. No time to regenerate them. Do you hear me? We've got to risk a full-power start!
SPOCK: I respected my father, our customs. I was ashamed of my Earth blood. (Kirk slaps him) Jim, when I feel friendship for you, I'm ashamed.
KIRK: (hitting him repeatedly) You've got to hear me! We need a formula. We've got to risk implosion!
SPOCK: t's never been done! Understand, Jim. I've spent a whole lifetime learning to hide my feelings. (finally hits Kirk back)
KIRK: We've got to risk implosion. It's our only chance.
SPOCK: It's never been done.
KIRK: Don't tell me that again, Science Officer! It's a theory. It's possible. We may go up into the biggest ball of fire since the last sun in these parts exploded, but we've got to take that one in ten thousand chance!
UHURA [OC]: Bridge to Captain. Engineer asked, did you find
KIRK: Yes, I found Mister Spock! I'm talking to Mister Spock, do you understand?
UHURA: Yes, sir. Three and a half minutes left, Captain.
KIRK: I've got it, the disease. Love. You're better off without it, and I'm better off without mine. This vessel, I give, she takes. She won't permit me my life. I've got to live hers.
SPOCK: Jim.
KIRK: I have a beautiful yeoman. Have you noticed her, Mister Spock? You're allowed to notice her. The Captain's not permitted
SPOCK: Jim, there is an intermix formula.
KIRK: Now I know why it's called she.
SPOCK: It's never been tested. It's a theoretical relationship between time and antimatter.
KIRK: Flesh woman to touch, to hold. A beach to walk on. A few days, no braid on my shoulder.
SCOTT: Captain.
KIRK: Scotty, help.
SPOCK: Stand by to intermix. I'll call the formulae in from the Bridge.
UHURA [OC]: Entering upper stratosphere, Captain. Skin temperature now twenty one hundred seventy degrees.
KIRK: I've got to hang on. Tell them. Clear the corridors, the turbo lift. Hurry. (Scott and Spock leave) Never lose you. Never.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Bridge.

[Bridge]

(McCoy gives Kirk a hypo as he leaves the turbolift) 
KIRK: Engine room. We're set. Hyperbolic course.
BRENT: Direction, sir?
KIRK: Direction. Direction. It doesn't matter. The way we came.
SULU: Course laid in, sir.

[Engineering]

SPOCK: Fuel temperature.
SCOTT: Level.

[Bridge]

KIRK: (gazing at Janice) No beach to walk on.
RAND: Sir?

[Engineering]

SPOCK: Raise antimatter eight and forty degrees.
SCOTT: That'll take four minutes.
SPOCK: We haven't the time. We'll have to risk it. Bridge, we're ready.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Engage. 
SPOCK: Are you all right, Jim?
KIRK: Are you? (Spock nods)
MCCOY: We found a cure. We're over that part of it. 
SPOCK: Obviously, we were successful. The engines imploded.
SULU: Captain, my velocity gauge is off the scale.
SPOCK: Engine power went off the scale as well. We're now travelling faster than is possible for normal space.
KIRK: Checked elapsed time, Mister Sulu.
SULU: My chronometer's running backwards, sir.
KIRK: Time warp. We're going backward in time. Helm, begin reversing power. Slowly.
SULU: Helm answering, sir. Power reversing.
SPOCK: We're back to normal time, Captain.
KIRK: Engines ahead. Warp one.
SULU: Warp one, sir.
KIRK: Mister Spock.
SPOCK: Yes, sir.
KIRK: The time warp. What did it do to us?
SPOCK: We've regressed in time seventy one hours. It is now three days ago, Captain. We have three days to live over again. 
KIRK: Not those last three days.
SPOCK: This does open some intriguing prospects, Captain. Since the formula worked, we can go back in time, to any planet, any era.
KIRK: We may risk it someday, Mister Spock. Resume course to our next destination, Mister Sulu.
SULU: Course laid in, sir.
KIRK: Steady as she goes.
KIRK: That should make a good specimen. 
SULU: (holding pink animal with a horn) Temperature's starting to drop. 
KIRK: Yeah. At night it gets down to a hundred and twenty degrees below zero. 
SULU: That's nippy. 
FISHER: Hey! 
KIRK: What happened? 
FISHER: I fell off that bank, sir. Cut my hand. 
KIRK: Let's see it. Get back to the ship. Report to the Sickbay. 
FISHER: Yes, sir. Geological Technician Fisher. Ready to beam up.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Right. Locked onto you. Energise. Coadjutor engagement. 
WILSON: What happened? 
FISHER: I took a flop. 
WILSON: Onto what? 
FISHER: I don't know. Some kind of yellow ore. 
SCOTT: Magnetic. Decontaminate that uniform. 
FISHER: Yes, sir. (;eaves) 
SCOTT: That acted like a burnout. 
KIRK [OC]: Captain Kirk ready to beam up. 
SCOTT: Just one moment, Captain. It checks out okay now. You better go get a synchronic meter so we can double-check. 
WILSON: Yes sir. 
SCOTT: All right, Captain. Locked onto you. (Kirk stumbles as he leaves the platform) Are you all right, Captain? 
KIRK: Yes, I'm all right. Just a little dizzy. 
SCOTT: Let me give you a hand. 
KIRK: I can't get through there. Nothing serious. Don't leave the transporter room unattended. 
SCOTT: Wilson will be right back, sir. 
(both leave, and another Kirk materialises on the pad)

Captain's Log, stardate 1672.1. Specimen-gathering mission on planet Alpha 177. Unknown to any of us during this time, a duplicate of me, some strange alter ego, had been created by the transporter malfunction.

[Transporter room]

WILSON: Captain? Are you all right, sir? Can I give you a hand, sir? Captain?

[Corridor]

UHURA [OC]: Bridge to all decks. Section duty officers, check communication lines. 
KIRK: Thank you. 
SCOTT: It might profit you to let Doctor McCoy give you the once-over. 
KIRK: All right, Engineer, I'll have my engines looked to.

[Kirk's quarters]

RAND: Ship's manifests, sir. I think they're in order now. 
KIRK: Thank you, Yeoman. 
RAND: I've checked 
KIRK: That's all. 
RAND: Yes, sir. (leaves Kirk to lie down on bed)

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: You picked a good day, Fisher. Business has been lousy. What'd you do, take a fall on purpose so you could get a little vacation? 
KIRK: Saurian brandy. 
Back to duty status, Fisher. I have no sympathy for clumsiness. 
FISHER: No, sir. The hand's much better, sir. (leaves) 
MCCOY: What can I do for you, Jim? 
KIRK: (grabbing him by the neck) I said, give me the brandy! (leaves with bottle and goes to Rand's quarters)

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Yeah. 
SPOCK [OC]: Mister Spock. 
KIRK: Come in. Yes, Mister Spock, what is it? 
SPOCK: Is there something I can do for you, Captain? 
KIRK: Like what? 
SPOCK: Well, Doctor McCoy seemed to think I should check on you. 
KIRK: That's nice. Come on, Spock, I know that look. What is it? 
SPOCK: Well, our good doctor said that you were acting like a wild man, demanded brandy. 
KIRK: Our good doctor's been putting you on again. 
SPOCK: Hmm. Well, in that case, if you'll excuse the intrusion Captain, I'll get back to my work. 
KIRK: I'll tell him you were properly annoyed. 
SPOCK: Captain.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: What is it, Scotty? 
SCOTT: Transporter breakdown. Continue circuit testing. We beamed up this animal and, well, look for yourself. It's in this specimen case. (opens lid to reveal angry pink animal) 
KIRK: Yes? 
SCOTT: A few seconds after they sent this one up through the transporter, that duplicate appeared. Except it's not a duplicate, it's an opposite. Two of the same animal, but different. One gentle, this. One mean and fierce, that. Some kind of savage, ferocious opposite. Captain, we don't dare send Mister Sulu and the landing party up. If this should happen to a man. 
KIRK: Oh, my.

[Rand's quarters]

RAND: Oh! Captain, you startled me. Is there something that you? Can I help you, Captain? 
KIRK: Jim will do here, Janice. 
RAND: Oh. 
KIRK: You're too beautiful to ignore. Too much woman. We've both been pretending too long. (grabs her) Stop pretending. Let's stop pretending. Come here, Janice. Don't fight me. Don't fight me, Janice. (kisses her) 
RAND: Captain! 
KIRK: Just a minute, Janice. Just a minute! (forces her onto the floor, she scratches his face and gets away to the door which opens just as Fisher is passing by) 
RAND: Call Mister Spock! Call Mister Spock!

[Corridor]

FISHER: Geological Technician Fisher. Deck twelve, section (Kirk grabs him and hits him, hard)

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK: Me? My yeoman said that? I've been resting here since you left me. Alone, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Doctor McCoy reports that you demanded this brandy in Sickbay and left with it. I found this bottle in Yeoman Rand's quarters. 
KIRK: Not true. I haven't been to the Sickbay. Let's find out what's going on.

[Turbolift]

KIRK: Sickbay. (just missing the other Kirk nursing grazed knuckles, who goes into his quarters)

[Sickbay]

RAND: Then he kissed me and he said that we, that he was the Captain and he could order me. I didn't know what to do. When you mentioned the feelings we'd been hiding, and you started talking about us. 
KIRK: Us? 
RAND: Well, he is the captain. I couldn't just. You started hurting me. I had to fight you, and scratch your face. 
KIRK: Yeoman, look at me. Look at me, look at my face. Are there any scratches? 
RAND: I was sure I scratched you. I was frightened. Maybe 
KIRK: Yeoman. I was in my room. It wasn't me. 
RAND: Sir, Fisher saw you, too. 
KIRK: Fisher saw? 
RAND: If it hadn't been. I can understand. I don't want to get you into trouble. I wouldn't have even mentioned it! 
KIRK: It wasn't me! 
FISHER: It was you, sir. 
KIRK: Do you know what you're saying? 
FISHER: Yes, I know what I'm saying. 
MCCOY: Back to that bed, bucko. Come on, let's go. 
SPOCK: You can go now, Yeoman. (Rand leaves) There's only one logical answer. We have an impostor aboard.

Captain's Log, stardate 1672.9. On the planet's surface, temperatures are beginning to drop, our landing party there in growing jeopardy. Due to the malfunction of the ship's transporter, an unexplained duplicate of myself definitely exists.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: How did all this happen? 
SCOTT: I don't know sir, but when Fisher came up, his suit was covered with a soft yellow ore that had highly unusual properties. It may have caused an overload. Can't tell, not yet. 
KIRK: Does the transporter work at all? 
SCOTT: Yes sir, but we don't dare bring up the landing party. It might be duplicated like this animal. 
KIRK: How long will it take you to find the trouble? 
SCOTT: Can't say, sir. 
KIRK: We just can't leave those four men down there. It's getting dark. They'll die. The surface temperature of that planet goes down to a hundred and twenty degrees below zero at night. 
SCOTT: We're doing everything we can, sir. 
KIRK: Yes, I know, Scotty. 
SPOCK: About your double, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, er, yes, we'll have to find him. Search parties, Mister Spock. Organise search parties. 
SPOCK: We can't take a chance on killing it. We have no previous experience, no way of knowing what would happen to you. 
KIRK: Yes, that's right. We don't know, but the men have to be armed. The men are to be armed, with their phasers locked, I repeat, locked, on setting number one. There can't be any chance of him being killed. He's to be taken without. If the men are forced to fire, he can't be killed. 
SPOCK: How shall we explain it to them, Captain? The search parties are to capture you? 
KIRK: Tell them. 
SPOCK: The search parties, Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, I'll make an announcement to the entire crew, tell them what happened. It's a good crew. They deserve to know. 
SPOCK: Captain, no disrespect intended, but you must surely realise you can't announce the full truth to the crew. You're the Captain of this ship. You haven't the right to be vulnerable in the eyes of the crew. You can't afford the luxury of being anything less than perfect. If you do, they lose faith, and you lose command. 
KIRK: Yes, I do know that, Mister Spock. What I don't know is why I forgot that just now. Mister Spock, if you see me slipping again, your orders, your orders are to tell me. 
SPOCK: Understood, Captain.

Captain's Log, stardate 1673.1. Something has happened to me. Somehow, in being duplicated, I have lost my strength of will. Decisions are becoming more and more difficult.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK [OC]: This is the Captain speaking. There's an impostor aboard the ship, a man who looks exactly like me and is pretending to be me. This man is dangerous. Utmost caution is to be observed. All crew members are to arm themselves. The impostor may be identified by scratches on his face. Repeat, the impostor may be identified by scratches on his face.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Section chiefs, assign personnel to the search. All search parties

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK [OC]: report to Mister Spock for assignment.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Something? 
SPOCK: About the phaser weapons to be set for stunning force and locked. 
KIRK: Oh, yes, yes. All hand phasers must be set on base cycle, stunning force.

[Kirk's quarters]

KIRK [OC]: The impostor is not to be injured. Use minimum force. Repeat, the imposter 
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk! 
KIRK [OC]: Is not to be injured. 
KIRK: I'm Captain Kirk. I'm Captain Kirk! I'm Captain Kirk! I'm Captain Kirk! (goes to mirror, covers scratches with makeup, opens door) Wilson! 
WILSON: Sir? 
KIRK: Wilson, give me your phaser. 
WILSON: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: How have you been? 
WILSON: Fine, sir. (Kirk grabs and hits him)

[Planet surface]

KIRK [OC]: How's it going down there, Mister Sulu? 
SULU: It's already twenty degrees below zero. Can't exactly

[Briefing room]

SULU [OC]: call it balmy. 
KIRK: Isn't there any way we can help them? 
SPOCK: Thermal heaters were transported down. They duplicated. They won't operate. 
KIRK: Then we've got to get those men up. 
CREWMAN [OC]: Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Spock here. 
CREWMAN [OC]: Transporter Technician Wilson found injured near the Captain's cabin. He says the impostor attacked him, called him by name, took his hand phaser. 
SPOCK: Acknowledged. Continue the search. 
KIRK: We've got to find him before he, but how? 
SPOCK: Apparently, this double, however different in temperament, has your knowledge of the ship, its crew, its devices. This being the case, perhaps we can outguess him by determining his next move. Knowing how the ship is laid out, where would you go to elude a mass search? 
KIRK: The lower levels. The Engineering deck.

[Engineering]

SPOCK: Set and locked on base cycle to stun, not to kill. What about your phaser, Captain? Don't you think we ought to get some help, Captain? 
KIRK: No. I don't want anyone else to see the 
SPOCK: Captain, you ordered me to tell you. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, if I'm to be the Captain, I've got to act like one. 
(they split up to search, and Kirk comes face to face with himself) 
KIRK: You can't hurt me. You can't kill me. You can't. Don't you understand? I'm part of you. You need me. I need you. 
OTHER KIRK: I don't need you. (Spock neck-pinches him, and his phaser fire hits a panel instead)

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: He'll be regaining consciousness soon, and not knowing what his physical state is, I don't think I dare give him a tranquilizer of any kind. I think we'd better bind him. 
KIRK: Yes. yes, all right. What's the matter with me? 
SPOCK: Judging from my observations, Captain, you're rapidly losing the power of decision. 
MCCOY: You have a point, Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, always, Doctor. We have here an unusual opportunity to appraise the human mind, or to examine, in Earth terms, the roles of good and evil in a man. His negative side, which you call hostility, lust, violence, and his positive side, which Earth people express as compassion, love, tenderness. 
MCCOY: It's the Captain's guts you're analysing. Are you of that, Spock? 
SPOCK: Yes, and what is it that makes one man an exceptional leader? We see indications that it's his negative side which makes him strong, that his evil side, if you will, properly controlled and disciplined, is vital to his strength. Your negative side removed from you, the power of command begins to elude you. 
KIRK: What is your point, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: If your power of command continues to weaken, you'll soon be unable to function as Captain. You must be prepared for that. 
MCCOY: You have your intellect, Jim. You can fight with that! 
KIRK: For how long? 
SPOCK: If I seem insensitive to what you're going through, Captain, understand it's the way I am. 
SCOTT [OC]: Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SCOTT [OC]: Mister Scott, sir, on the lower level of the Engineering deck.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: I've found a new trouble with the transporter. The casing has a wide gap ripped in it. (the phaser damage) The main circuits

[Sickbay]

SCOTT [OC]: have been burned through. The abort control circuit is gone altogether.

[Planet surface]

SULU: Can you give us a status report, Captain? Temperature's still dropping. Now forty one degrees below zero. 
KIRK [OC]: We've located the trouble. It shouldn't be much longer. 
SULU: Do you think you might be able to find a long rope somewhere and lower us down a pot of hot coffee?

[Sickbay]

KIRK: I'll see what we can do. 
SULU [OC]: Rice wine will do, if you're short on coffee. 
KIRK: Engineering deck, Kirk here. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here, Captain. 
KIRK: That unit, Scotty, status report. 
SCOTT [OC]: The transporter unit ioniser. Nothing much left of it, sir. 
KIRK: How bad is it? 
SCOTT [OC]: We can't repair it in less than a week.

Captain's Log, stardate 1673.5. Transporter still inoperable. My negative self is under restraint in Sickbay. My own indecisiveness growing. My force of will steadily weakening. On the planet, condition critical. Surface temperature is seventy five degrees below zero, still dropping.

[Planet surface]

SULU: (using phaser to heat rocks) I think we ought to give room service another call. That coffee's taking too long. Enterprise, this is Sulu.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: Kirk here, Mister Sulu. 
SULU [OC]: Hot line direct to the Captain. Are we that far gone? 
KIRK: I gave everybody the afternoon off. I'm watching the store.

[Planet surface]

KIRK [OC]: How is it down there? 
SULU: Oh, lovely, except that the frost is building up. We're using hand phasers to heat the rocks. One phaser quit on us, three still operating. Any possibility of getting us back aboard before the skiing season opens down here?

[Briefing room]

SPOCK: This is Spock, Mister Sulu. You'll have to hold on a little longer. There's no other way. Survival procedures, Mister Sulu. 
SULU [OC]: Per your training programme, Mister Spock.

[Sickbay]

(other Kirk is screaming) 
KIRK: What happened? 
MCCOY: Apparently the body functioning weakened during the duplication process. A fact I failed to consider. 
KIRK: He's not dying? 
KIRK: Yes, he is. 
OTHER KIRK: Help me. 
KIRK: How can he die? Can I survive without him? 
MCCOY: I don't know, Jim. 
KIRK: Don't be afraid. Here's my hand. Hold on. You don't have to be afraid. I won't let go. Hold on. You won't be afraid if you use your mind and think! Think! You can do it. That's it! 
MCCOY: Jim, he is back! Jim, you can use that brandy now. In fact, I'll join you. 
KIRK: I have to take him back inside myself. I can't survive without him. I don't want him back. He's like an animal, a thoughtless, brutal animal, and yet it's me. Me. 
MCCOY: Jim, you're no different than anyone else. We all have our darker side. We need it! It's half of what we are. It's not really ugly, it's human. 
KIRK: Human. 
MCCOY: Yes, human. A lot of what he is makes you the man you are. God forbid I should have to agree with Spock, but he was right. Without the negative side, you wouldn't be the Captain. You couldn't be, and you know it. Your strength of command lies mostly in him. 
KIRK: What do I have? 
MCCOY: You have the goodness. 
KIRK: Not enough. I have a ship to command. 
MCCOY: The intelligence, the logic. It appears your half has most of that, and perhaps that's where man's essential courage comes from. For you see, he was afraid and you weren't. 
SPOCK [OC]: Captain Kirk. 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here. Would you come to the transporter room. We think we may have found an answer. 
KIRK: Coming.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: What is it? 
SCOTT: We've found a way to get the transporter working, sir. 
SPOCK: We've attached some bypass and leader circuits to compensate for the difference. Tied directly into the impulse engines, there shouldn't be more than a five point variation in the velocity balance. I suggest we send the animal through. Captain. 
KIRK: Yes, yes. Go ahead. 
SCOTT: (opening box with angry animal in it) I'll grab him by the scruff of the neck and hold him as long as I can. 
KIRK: Don't hurt him. 
SPOCK: It's painless and quick. The animal will be unconscious for only a few minutes. (sedates it) 
SCOTT: If this doesn't work, I don't know what will. 
SPOCK: Energise. Reverse. 
SPOCK: The shock of putting him back together seems to have been too much for him. 
MCCOY: He's dead, Jim.

Captain's Log, stardate 1673.1. Entry made by Second Officer Spock. Captain Kirk retains command of this vessel, but his force of will rapidly fading. Condition of landing party critical. Transporter unit still under repair.

[Sickbay]

MCCOY: Autopsy in-depth. Hurry. I don't know. Animal could have died of some kind of shock. 
SPOCK: For once, I agree with you. 
MCCOY: I said could have, Mister Spock. We won't know until we get a full post-mortem. 
SPOCK: No autopsy is necessary to know that the animal was terrified, confused. It was split into two halves and suddenly thrust back together again. Thus shock induced by blind terror. 
KIRK: Yes, yes, that sounds likely. 
SPOCK: It couldn't understand. You can. You have your intelligence controlling your fear. 
KIRK: Get the transporter room ready. 
MCCOY: Could be, if, maybe. All guesswork so far. Just theory. Jim, why don't you give me a chance to do an autopsy and let Spock check the transporter circuits again. 
KIRK: That sounds, sounds reasonable. We should double-check everything. 
SPOCK: Aren't you forgetting something, Captain? 
KIRK: No, I don't think I've for 
SPOCK: Your men on the planet surface. How much time do they have left? 
KIRK: Yes, that's right. The men. We have to take the chance, Bones. Their lives 
MCCOY: Suppose it wasn't shock, Jim. Suppose death was caused by transporter malfunction. Then you'd die. They'd die, anyway. Jim, you can't risk your life on a theory! 
SPOCK: Being split in two halves is no theory with me, Doctor. I have a human half, you see, as well as an alien half, submerged, constantly at war with each other. Personal experience, Doctor. I survive it because my intelligence wins over both, makes them live together. Your intelligence would enable you to survive as well. 
KIRK: Help me. Somebody make the decision. 
SPOCK: Are you relinquishing your command, Captain? 
KIRK: No. No, I'm not. 
MCCOY: Well then, we can't help you, Jim. The decision is yours. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, ready the transporter room. Bones, continue the autopsy. 
UHURA [OC]: Captain Kirk, I have a tie-in with Sulu now. 
KIRK: Kirk here.

[Planet surface]

SULU: Captain K-Kirk, Sulu here. One hundred seventeen below. Can't last much longer.

[Sickbay]

SULU [OC]: Can't see clearly, Doctor, to read top indicator. Think the cold penetrating communicator. Two men unconscious. No time. No. Can't wait. No time. 
KIRK: Mister Sulu. Mister Sulu. Can't wait. Can't let them die. 
OTHER KIRK: What are you going to do? 
KIRK: Go through the transporter, both of us. 
OTHER KIRK: There's nothing I can do to stop you. 
KIRK: It's what I have to do. It's what I have to do. What we have to do. 
OTHER KIRK: I won't fight you anymore. Oh, I feel so weak. I'll be glad when this is over. (grabs Kirk and knocks him out)

[Corridor]

KIRK: Janice, hello. 
RAND: Captain, I 
KIRK: Yeoman, I owe you an explanation. 
RAND: No. 
KIRK: Yes, I do. The transporter malfunctioned, divided me, created a duplicate. The animal part of me came to your cabin. He even scratched me to make us look more alike. I'd like the chance to explain it to you. You don't mind if I come to your cabin later? 
RAND: No, sir. 
KIRK: (enters turbolift) Bridge.

[Bridge]

FARRELL: No word from Mister Sulu, sir. 
OTHER KIRK: Prepare to leave orbit, Mister Farrell. Well? 
FARRELL: Captain! 
OTHER KIRK: I gave you an order, Mister Farrell. 
FARRELL: But what about 
OTHER KIRK: They can't be saved. Prepare to leave orbit. 
FARRELL: Yes, sir. 
SPOCK: Captain, I thought the plan 
OTHER KIRK: I've changed my mind. Man your station, Mister Spock. (McCoy enters with another Kirk, identically dressed) Grab him. He's the impostor. 
MCCOY: No! 
OTHER KIRK: McCoy, he's fooled you. 
MCCOY: He (the one in the captain's chair) attacked him. 
OTHER KIRK: Mister Spock, you know who I am. You know what that is. 
FARRELL: Mister Spock, which one? What do we do? 
SPOCK: We'll let the captain handle this. 
OTHER KIRK: I'm the captain. Isn't that obvious? Look at his face. Remember the scratches? Look how he's tried to hide them. He wants you to think that he's Captain Kirk. You know who I am. 
KIRK: Yes, I know. 
OTHER KIRK: You want to kill me, don't you? Farrell, James, grab him. He'll destroy the ship! I'm the Captain. Don't you understand? I'm captain of the ship! (starts attacking the crew) I'm the captain! This is my ship! My ship! It's mine! I'll kill you. 
KIRK: Can half a man live? 
OTHER KIRK: Take another step, you'll die. 
KIRK: Then we'll both die. 
OTHER KIRK: Please, I don't want to. Don't make me. Don't make me. (Kirk takes phaser off him) I don't want to go back. Please! I want to live! 
KIRK: You will. Both of us. 
OTHER KIRK: I want to live!

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: You'll have to hold on to him, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Captain? 
KIRK: If this doesn't work. 
SPOCK: Understood, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Ready. (beams them out) 
MCCOY: Well, Mister Spock? (one figure is beamed back) Jim? 
KIRK: Get those men aboard fast. 
SPOCK: Right away, Captain. 
MCCOY: (as the party is wheeled away) Severe exposure and frostbite, but I think they'll make it. How do you feel, Jim? 
KIRK: How? I've seen a part of myself no man should ever see.

[Bridge]

FARRELL: Status report, green. 
SPOCK: All sections report ready, sir. 
KIRK: Good. Thank you, Mister Spock, from both of us. 
SPOCK: Shall I pass that on to the crew, sir? 
KIRK: The impostor's back where he belongs. Let's forget him. 
RAND: Captain? The impostor told me what happened, who he really was, and I'd just like to say that. Well, sir, what I'd like is 
KIRK: Thank you, Yeoman. 
SPOCK: The, er, impostor had some interesting qualities, wouldn't you say, Yeoman? 
KIRK: This is the Captain speaking. Navigator, set in course correction. Helmsman, steady as she goes.

Captain's log, Stardate 1329.8. The U.S.S. Enterprise in pursuit of an unidentified vessel.
[Bridge]

SULU: There he is, sir. Centre screen. Still trying to run away from us, sir. 
KIRK: Don't lose him, Mister Sulu.
SULU: No, sir.
KIRK: Earth ship, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: Difficult to say, Captain. We're getting no registration beam from it.
SCOTT: If it is, he'll soon overload his engines.
SPOCK: Sir, he's pushing his engines too hard. 
SULU: Changing course again. He knows we're after him all right.
KIRK: Stay with him, Mister Sulu. Communication?
UHURA: I've tried all frequencies, sir. He refuses to answer. Unless he's not receiving us. 
KIRK: He's receiving us alright. 
SPOCK: Approaching an asteroid belt, Captain. Schiller rating three five. 
KIRK: Deflectors on, Mister Farrell. 
SULU: He's seen the asteroids too, sir. 
KIRK: Stay with him. He'll try to lose us in them. 
SULU: If one hits him. 
SPOCK: Sensor reading on the vessel. I make it out as a small class J cargo ship, and his engines are super-heating. 
KIRK: Try to warn him. If he loses power now 
FARRELL: There go his engines, sir. 
SULU: He's drifting into the asteroid belt, Captain. 
FARRELL: He's had it, unless we put our deflector screen around him. 
SCOTT: Captain, if we try, we'll overload our own engines. He's too far away. 
KIRK: Cover him with our deflector screen, Mister Farrell. Scotty, Spock, stand by in the transporter room. 
SCOTT: Aye, sir. (they leave) 
FARRELL: We're protecting him, sir. We won't be able to hold it long. 
SULU: We're overloading, Captain. Engine temperatures climbing. 
CREWMAN [OC]: This is the Engine room. Temperatures are passing the danger line. 
FARRELL Our deflector screen's weakening, sir. We can't protect them much longer. (lights flicker)
SULU: That was one of our lithium crystal circuits, sir. 
KIRK: Bridge to transporter room. If you don't start beaming that crew over soon 
SCOTT [OC]: They're not answering our signal. There's nothing to lock onto. 
SULU (lights go out again) Another circuit, sir. 
UHURA: I'm getting a distress signal call from them, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty, we're getting a distress signal.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: We're locked onto something, Captain. 
MUDD: Meaning no ingratitude, gentlemen, but just where is it I find meself? 
MCCOY: You're aboard the U.S.S. Enterprise. 
MUDD: It's really a darn beautiful ship, isn't it? Really a beautiful ship. Oh, the name, gentlemen, is Walsh, Captain Leo Walsh. 
SPOCK: How many more in your crew? 
MUDD: Just a few more. 
SCOTT: Your vessel's breaking up, man. If we don't get them over here right now 
MUDD: We couldn't be sure you was a friendly vessel, now could we. Ah, but the three will be in position about by now.

[Bridge]

SULU: Another lithium circuit. Now supplementing with battery power, sir. 
KIRK: Scotty, how many of them did you get aboard? 
SCOTT [OC]: Only one, sir, but we've locked onto three more.

[Transporter room]

SPOCK: What's wrong? 
SCOTT: I don't know, sir. With those three lithium crystals gone 
SPOCK: It'll take longer on battery power. 
MCCOY: Never trusted this.

[Bridge]

FARRELL: There she goes. 
SULU: Asteroid hit him dead centre.

[Transporter room]

KIRK [OC]: Bridge to transporter room. Their vessel has been hit by an asteroid. It's gone. Did you get the crew off? 
SCOTT: Not yet, sir, but we've hooked onto something. (three women beam in, the men are transfixed) 
KIRK [OC]: Kirk to transporter room. Report. 
MUDD: It's all right, darlings. We're in good hands.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Bridge to transporter room. 
FARRELL: We're clearing the asteroid belt now, Captain. 
KIRK: Deflector screen down, Mister Farrell. Save the power.

[Transporter room]

KIRK [OC]: Captain to transporter room. Are you reading me or not, Mister Scott? Bridge to transporter room. How many did we get off? 
SCOTT: Oh, er, four in all, sir. 
KIRK [OC]: If that captain can walk, I want him in my cabin immediately. Correction,

[Bridge]

KIRK: I want him there whether he can walk or not. Kirk out.

[Transporter room]

MUDD: That fellow sounded a mite upset, didn't he? 
MCCOY: Yes. Yes, they are. 
SPOCK: Curious. You're certain this was everyone aboard, Mister Walsh? No other crewmen? 
MUDD: Oh, no, that's everyone, all right, but so far as the ladies actually being the crew 
SPOCK: You can explain that to the Captain. (the group leave) 
MCCOY: Amen to that, Scotty.

[Corridor]

MUDD: Ah, sure, these starships are really something marvellous, but men will always be men no matter where they are. Eh, mister? You'll never take that out of them.

[Turbolift]

SPOCK: Deck twelve. 
MUDD: You're part Vulcanian, aren't you. Ah well then, a pretty face doesn't affect you at all, does it. That is, unless you want it to. You can save it, girls. This type can turn himself off from any emotion. 
EVE: I apologise for what he said, sir. He's used to buying and selling people. 
MUDD: I'll handle the conversation, darling.

[Captain's quarters]

KIRK: Come. 
SPOCK: The Commander of the transport to see you, Captain. 
KIRK: Good. Now, if you don't mind telling 
EVE: Hello. 
KIRK: And the ladies? Is this your crew, Captain? 
MUDD: Well, no, Captain. This is me cargo.

Captain's log, Stardate 1329.1. We've taken aboard from unregistered transport vessel its captain and, and three unusual females. These women have a mysterious magnetic effect on the male members of my crew, including myself. Explanation unknown at present.

[Captain's quarters]

MUDD: Well, how the devil am I supposed to know this is a starship, Captain? Here I am with a cargo of young lovelies. A strange ship comes up alongside. Well. naturally I did my best to evade you. And starship Captain or no, you exceeded your authority when you drove me and mine into a shower of asteroids. 
KIRK: Your name, please. 
MUDD: Walsh. Leo Walsh. You destroyed me ship, Captain. 
KIRK: Mister Walsh, I'm convening a ship's hearing on your actions. Mister Spock will supply you with any legal information you may need for your defence. 
MUDD: You're a hard-nosed one, Captain. 
KIRK: And you're a liar, Mister Walsh. I think we both understand each other. Security! Escort Mister Walsh to his quarters. Confine him there.

[Bridge]

SULU: You're on duty, Johnny-o. Back to reality. 
FARRELL: You can feel their eyes when they look at you, like something grabbing hold of you. Did you notice that? 
SULU: I noticed. How I noticed. Come on, Johnny. 
SCOTT: We've got trouble, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: I'm well aware of that, Mister Scott. 
SCOTT: One lithium crystal left, and that with a hairline split at the base. 
SPOCK: Better rig a by-pass circuit. 
SCOTT: Can't. We blew the whole converter assembly. 
KIRK [OC]: Kirk here. 
SPOCK: Needed on the bridge, Captain.

[Briefing room]

WOMEN: Harry! Where were you? 
MUDD: Shh! Calm down now, darlings. Would you mind waiting outside? 
SECURITY: Sorry, sir. 
MUDD: Well, now, answer every question they put to you. Don't lie. Well, you've no need to, have you, and don't submit to a med. That is, being so healthy, they've no need for a medical exam, have they. 
RUTH: What if they ask about 
MUDD: They won't. Have you no place to go lads? 
MAGDA: They'll notice we're different. 
MUDD: No, no, no, they won't. Just let Leo take all the hard questions. Now don't be panicking, loves. We'll get to 
EVE: Get where? We don't have a ship and we're headed the wrong way, Harry. 
NUDD: Leo. Leo Walsh is me name, darling. Don't forget that. So lovely. Lovely, aren't they? If they only think lovely thoughts, if they smile, they'll come out right some which way, won't they? My personal guarantee on that.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: The entire ship's power is feeding through one lithium crystal. 
KIRK: Well, switch to by-pass circuits. 
SCOTT: We burned them all out when we super-heated. That jackass Walsh not only wrecked his vessel, but in saving his skin 
KIRK: If it makes you feel better, Engineer, that's one jackass we're going to see skinned. 
SCOTT: But it's frustrating. Almost a million gross tons of vessel depending on a hunk of crystal the size of my fist. 
SPOCK: And that crystal won't hold up, not pulling all our power through it. 
KIRK: Well, Mister Spock? 
SPOCK: There's a lithium mining operation on Rigel 12. High-grade ore, I've heard. 
KIRK: Location and distance. 
SPOCK: Mister Farrell has the course. Less than two day's travel. 
KIRK: Make for Rigel 12, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Rigel 12, Mister Farrell. You have the course.

Captain's log, Stardate 1329.2. On board the U.S.S. Enterprise, a ship's hearing is being convened against the transport vessel's captain. I'm becoming concerned about the almost-hypnotic effect produced by the women.

[Briefing room]

KIRK: This hearing is convened. Stardate 1329.2, on board starship U.S.S. Enterprise. Formal hearings against transport captain Leo Walsh. Start computer. 
SPOCK: State your name for the record. 
MUDD: Leo Francis Walsh. 
COMPUTER: Incorrect. 
SPOCK: Your correct name. 
MUDD: Gentlemen, surely you're not going to take the word of a soulless mechanical device over that of a real flesh and blood man. 
SPOCK: State your correct name for the record. 
MUDD: Harry Mudd. 
COMPUTER: Incorrect. 
MUDD: Harcourt Fenton Mudd. 
SPOCK: Any past offenses, Mister Mudd? 
MUDD: Of course not. Gentlemen, I'm simply an honest businessman. 
COMPUTER: Incorrect. 
MUDD: Blast that tin-plated pot. 
COMPUTER: Full data coming on screen. RUTH: If it can read our minds, too. 
MUDD: It can't, darling. It can't. Just what's on the record. COMPUTER: Offense record. Smuggling. Sentence suspended. Transport of stolen goods. Purchase of space vessel with counterfeit currency. Sentences, psychiatric treatment, effectiveness disputed. 
KIRK: Mister Mudd, you're charged with galaxy travel without a flight plan, without an identification beam, and failure to answer a starship's signal, thus effecting a menace to navigation. 
MUDD: What? My tiny ship in this immense galaxy a menace to navigation? 
KIRK: You're also charged with operation of a vessel without a master's license. 
MUDD: Untrue! I have a master's ticket. 
COMPUTER: Incorrect. Master's license revoked Stardate 1116.4. 
MUDD: All right. Well, very simply, Leo Walsh, who was to be my captain on this trip, passed away suddenly. Well, I had no choice but to take out me ship me own self. I assumed Leo's name out of courtesy to him. In memoriam, as it were. A fine, fine man, alas, gone to his reward. 
KIRK: Destination and purpose of journey? 
MUDD: Planet Ophiuchus 3. Wiving settlers. 
KIRK: Come again, Mister Mudd. You do what? 
MUDD: I recruit wives for settlers, a difficult but satisfying task. 
KIRK: Data on witnesses. 
COMPUTER: No data. 
KIRK: Computer, go to sensor probe. Any unusual readings? 
COMPUTER: No decipherable reading on females. However, unusual reading on male board members. Detecting high respiration patterns, perspiration rate up, heartbeat rapid, blood pressure higher than normal. 
KIRK: Er, that's sufficient. Strike that from the record. 
MUDD: You see, gentlemen, just as I told you. Three lovely ladies destined for frontier planets to be the companions of lonely men, to supply that warmth of a human touch that's so desperately needed. A wife, a home, a family. Gentlemen, I look upon this work as a sacred public trust. I've devoted me whole life to it. 
COMPUTER: Incorrect. 
MUDD: Well, I'm about to start devoting my entire life to it. 
KIRK: Did these ladies come voluntarily? 
MUDD: Well, of course! Now, for example, Ruthie here comes from a pelagic planet, sea ranchers. Magda there from the helium experimental station. 
EVE: It's the same story for all of us, Captain. No men. Mine was a farm planet with automated machines for company and two brothers to cook for, mend their clothes, canal mud a foot thick on their boots every time they walked in. 
MUDD: Fine, Evie. Fine. 
EVE: It's not fine! We've got men willing to be our husbands waiting for us, and you're taking us in the opposite direction! Staring at us Iike we were Saturnius harem girls or something. 
MUDD: That's enough, Evie. 
KIRK: The only charges are against Mister Mudd. Illegal operation of a vessel. Do you have any defence to offer? 
MUDD: Only heaven's own truth, which I've just given you. 
KIRK: The hearing is closed. Mister Mudd to be handed over to the legal authorities at our earliest opportunity. 
EVE: And what about us? What happens to us? Help us, please. All of us. 
KIRK: Miss McHuron, if you don't mind 
SCOTT: Our last crystal, sir. It's gone. 
SULU: Captain Kirk, engineering section reports our entire life-support system is now on batteries. 
KIRK: Mister Spock. Miss McHuron, would you mind. Mister Spock, will you contact the miners on Rigel 12? Notify them that we'll need the lithium crystals immediately upon arrival. (all officers leave) 
MUDD: Oh, you beautiful galaxy! Oh, that heavenly universe! Well, girls, lithium miners. Don't you understand? Lonely, isolated, overworked, rich lithium miners! Girls, do you still want husbands, hmm? Evie, you won't be satisfied with a mere ship's captain. I'll get you a man who can buy you a whole planet. Maggie, you're going to be a countess. Ruth, I'll make you a duchess. And I, I'll be running this starship. Captain James Kirk, the next orders you're taking will be given by Harcourt Fenton Mudd!

Captain's log-- Stardate 1330.1. Position, fourteen hours out of Rigel 12. We're on auxiliary impulse engines. Fuel low, barely sufficient to achieve orbit over the planet. Lithium replacements are now imperative. The effect of Mudd's women on my crew continues to grow, still totally unexplained. Harry Mudd is confined to his quarters under guard.

[Sickbay]

RUTH: May I come in? 
MCCOY: Why, yes, please do. By all means. Connors, are you finished? 
RUTH: I was wondering what this place looked like. It's fascinating. 
MCCOY: Would, Would you walk past my panel again, please? 
RUTH: Your what? 
MCCOY: My medical scanner. 
RUTH: Oh, why? You're not giving me an examination, are you? 
MCCOY: Oh no. I wouldn't trust my, my judgment, believe me. Just walk by, please. (scanner heart monitor activates) It's not supposed to do that. 
RUTH: I wondered, will you be examining the miners on Rigel 12? 
MCCOY: Yes, if they need it. 
RUTH: You haven't asked yet? Are they in good health and all? 
MCCOY: What? Oh, yes, they're in excellent health, all three of them. 
RUTH: Oh. Three. 
MCCOY: Are you wearing some unusual kind of perfume or something radioactive, my dear? 
RUTH: No. I'm just me. 
MCCOY: I wonder what makes it do that.

[Kirk's quarters]

EVE: Captain? I hope you don't mind. 
KIRK: As a matter of fact, Miss McHuron, I do. 
EVE: I was trying to take a walk, and I just, I just had to run in someplace. You see, all your men were looking at me, following me with their eyes. 
KIRK: Yes. I'll have to talk to them about that. They, er, they don't do that ordinarily, Miss McHuron, but somehow, in your case, and the ladies with you, its, er 
EVE: They're probably just lonely. I can understand loneliness. 
KIRK: Yes. Yes, er, now, Miss McHuron 
EVE: I, I suppose you understand it even more, having to run a huge ship like this with so much responsibility every minute and having to be so careful with all your men looking up to you. 
KIRK: Well, it probably appears more difficult than it is. 
EVE: Hmm! I read once that a commander has to act like a paragon of virtue. I never met a paragon. 
KIRK: Neither have I. 
EVE: Well, of course not. No one is. But some people try to pretend. Do you, Captain? 
KIRK: Miss McHuron, I don't 
EVE: Oh, no! Oh, I just can't do it. I don't care what Harry Mudd says. I do like you, but I just can't go through with it. I hate this whole thing!

[Mudds's quarters]

MUDD: Just three? You're sure? 
RUTH: Yes. The miners are healthy and fairly young. 
MUDD: Later, dear, later. Magda, did you get to your communications man? 
MAGDA: The head miner is named Ben Childress. The others are Gossett and Benton. 
MUDD: And they've been there? 
RUTH: Almost three years now, alone! 
MUDD: Perfect. Perfect. Three of them and three lovely ladies has Harry Mudd. And lithium crystals, my dear, are worth three hundred times their weight in diamonds, thousands of times their weight in gold. 
RUTH: But they'll be down there, and we'll be up here, circling a hundred miles above them. 
MAGDA: And there's a guard outside your door, Harry. You can't get out of your cabin. 
MUDD: No, my dears. After one more job for you, it won't be Harry Mudd that's trapped. It will be a gentleman named James T 
EVE: I don't like you, and I'm not very happy with myself, either. 
MUDD: Well, I'm not really surprised. I've seen you noticing the Captain. 
EVE: We're supposed to notice them! Oh, oh Harry, I don't feel very good. I think it must be near the time.

[Bridge]

KIRK: I asked for a preorbital course, Mister Farrell. 
FARRELL: Preorbital course locked in, sir. 
KIRK: That's the last time I'm giving an order twice, gentlemen. We're down to battery power, and we're low on that. 
SCOTT: It'll get us to Rigel 12, sir, but it'll be a shaky orbit. 
KIRK: Just hang us in long enough to get six crystals, Scotty. That's all we need. 
SCOTT: I'll get you there. 
KIRK: Ridiculous. What are we running here. Did you examine them? Did you examine Eve? 
MCCOY: She refused. 
KIRK: Well, come on, you're the doctor. What is it? Is it that we're tired, and they're beautiful? They are incredibly beautiful. 
MCCOY: Are they, Jim? Are they actually more lovely, pound for pound, measurement for measurement, than any other women you've known? Or is it that they just, well, act beautiful. No. Strike that, strike that. 
KIRK: What are they? 
MCCOY: You mean are they alien illusions? That sort of thing? 
KIRK: I asked you first. 
MCCOY: No, an alien smart enough to pull this could also keep my medical scanner from going beep! 
KIRK: I don't follow you. 
MCCOY: I don't either.

[Mudd's quarters]

MAGDA: Top space frequency of three nine. (hands over communicator) 
MUDD: Rigel 12. Rigel 12. 
CHILDRESS [OC]: This is Rigel 12. Come in, Enterprise. 
MUDD: Well, this isn't exactly the Enterprise. My name is Harry Mudd. To whom have I the pleasure of speaking, sir?

[Bridge]

SULU: Power curve still dropping, Captain. 
FARRELL: We'll make orbit, sir. A temporary one. 
KIRK: Lay in. Computer? 
SPOCK: We can sustain this orbit for three days, seven hours. 
KIRK: More than enough time. Communications, have a representative of the Rigel 12 miners meet us here to discuss our needs. Beam him up first pass over their camp. 
UHURA: Yes, sir.

[Mudd's quarters]

RUTH: Look what's happening. (hair lank, skin slightly lined) Look at my face. 
MAGDA: Give us the pills. 
RUTH: What if someone sees us like this? 
EVE: You'll never find them, Harry, and if you do find them you know what they are. A cheat. If you care for someone, really care 
MUDD: (ransacking drawers frantically) For whom, Evie? For Kirk? You'll find out that Ship's captains are already married, girl, to their vessels. You'd find out the first time you came between him and the ship. You'll see. 
RUTH: I'm going back to what I was. Ugly. 
MAGDA: I can't stand myself like this. 
RUTH: Why did you hide them, Harry? Don't you trust us? 
MUDD: I didn't hide them, girl. I put them in a safe place in case I was searched. 
MADGA: Find the pill, Harry! 
MUDD: Mattress! Yes, here! (Ruth and Magda devour them eagerly) Go on, Eve. Take it. It's not a cheat. It's a miracle for some man who can appreciate it and who needs it.

[Kirk's quarters]

SPOCK: Even burned and cracked, they're beautiful. Destroying them was a shame. 
KIRK: Not at all, Mister Spock. The choice was burning this lithium crystal or the destruction of another man's ship. Come. SECURITY: Sir. Mining Chief Childress and Mister Gossett. 
KIRK: Good. Show them in. I'm James Kirk, captain of the Enterprise. This is my science officer Mister Spock. 
CHILDRESS: Let's get right to business. You want lithium crystals and we've got them. 
KIRK: Fine. I'm authorised to pay an equitable price. 
CHILDRESS: We're not sure they're for sale, Captain. We might prefer a swap. 
KIRK: What did you have in mind? 
CHILDRESS: Mudd's women. 
GOSSETT: If we like them. We'd like to have a look at them first of course. 
CHILDRESS: Right. Trot them out, Captain. Oh, and Harry Mudd. Either way, I've agreed to have him released. Charges dropped. 
KIRK: (laughs) Is there anything else? 
CHILDRESS: You've got no choice, Kirk. You beam a landing party down, and you won't find one blessed crystal. 
KIRK: No deal. You're a long way out in space, gentlemen. You'll need medical help, cargo runs, starship protection. You want to consider those facts too? 
MUDD: Come along, ladies, come along. You must be Ben Childress. Come on now, girls, come on. 
RUTH: And you must be Herm Gossett. 
GOSSETT: Yes, I reckon I am. 
CHILDRESS: One thing I'll say for you, Mudd, you're not a liar. Ladies, you are welcome. 
KIRK: It's still no deal. 
SPOCK: Conserving batteries, sir. Half power. 
MUDD: I'm told they have only three days of orbit left before they start spiraling in. I do hate to see you suffering such a situation, Captain, but truth is truth, and the sad fact is you will deal. Sooner or later, you'll have to.

Captain's log. Transporting down to surface of planet Rigel 12 to acquire replacement lithium crystals. Expect further difficulty from miners.

[Miner's camp]

KIRK: All right, Childress, you've won. Now I'll take the lithium crystals. 
CHILDRESS: When I have the time, Kirk. 
KIRK: Childress. 
CHILDRESS: We're busy, Mister Kirk. 
SPOCK: We don't have the time to spare, Captain. 
KIRK: You got a better idea? 
CHILDRESS: (to Eve) Blows like that all the time. You can get lost a dozen feet from your doorstep. The wind comes up sudden. Magnetic storm. That means the wind will really rip soon. 
MAGDA: Dance with me. 
CHILDRESS: Would you like to dance? 
EVE: No, I (coughs) No. I'm sorry, I guess it must be the dust. 
CHILDRESS: That's the way it is on Rigel all the time. (cuts in on Ruth instead) 
GOSSETT: Hey. 
BENTON: Go away. 
GOSSETT: I'm cutting in. 
BENTON: Not on me. (fight starts) 
CHILDRESS: What's the matter with you? 
EVE: Why don't you run a raffle and the loser gets me? (leaves) 
CHILDRESS: You can't go out there. You'll get killed. 
KIRK: Just have those crystals here when I get back.

[Planet surface]

KIRK: Eve! Eve!

Captain's log. Have transported aboard the Enterprise to implement search with infrared scanners and sensing system. Magnetic storms on the planet's surface are cutting down speed and efficiency of our equipment. Search now in progress for three hours, eighteen minutes.

[Bridge]

FARRELL: Traverse parallel three and four. 
SULU: Checking, but not getting much. 
SPOCK: The storm is ionising the atmosphere, Captain. Getting difficult to probe through it. 
SCOTT: Captain, this is draining our batteries further. If we only had those crystals. 
KIRK: But we don't! I didn't get any. I should have found a way. Satisfied, Mister Scott? 
UHURA: Losing communications with the miners, sir. Magnetic storm seems worse. 
KIRK: Has Childress reported in yet? 
UHURA: No, sir. He and the girl are still missing. 
KIRK: Sorry, Scotty. How much power do we have left? 
SCOTT: About five hours, sir.

Captain's log. Have expended all but forty three minutes of power. Ship's condition, critical. Search now in progress seven hours, thirty one minutes. Magnetic storms are easing.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Infrared reading. Check traverse three, grid zero four zero. 
FARRELL: About eleven miles, bearing one two one from the mining company. 
SULU: That's Ben Childress' quarters. 
SPOCK: There's a heat unit operating in there. It could be a cookstove. 
KIRK: Have Mudd meet me in the transporter room. 
SPOCK: Mudd? 
KIRK: The name of this game.

[Childress' quarters]

CHILDRESS: I had things where I wanted them. 
EVE: I ate some of your food, so I paid with some chores. 
CHILDRESS: And I do my own cooking. I've not laid a hand on you. Remember that. 
EVE: Oh, the sound of male ego. You travel halfway across the galaxy, and it's still the same song. There. You going to eat or talk? 
CHILDRESS: I guess I'm supposed to sit, taste, and roll my eyes. Ooh, female cooking again. I've tasted better, by my own hand. 
EVE: Well you're tasting some of it now. I couldn't scrape three layers of your leavings out of that pan. 
CHILDRESS: You find me a well, some decent water, then talk. 
EVE: Well, why don't you hang your pan out in the wind and let the sand blast it clean, or hadn't you thought about that? 
CHILDRESS: (after hanging out the pots) It might work. That solitaire? 
EVE: Double jack. 
CHILDRESS: The red eight ought to go on the black nine. 
EVE: Not in double jack. 
CHILDRESS: You're not only plain as an old bucket, you're not even good company. What the devil happened to your looks, anyway? 
EVE: I got tired of you. I slumped. 
CHILDRESS: You heard what I said. You're homely! I've got enough in crystals already to buy queens by the gross! (Kirk and Mudd enter) I didn't touch her. 
MUDD: Thank heaven you found her. 
CHILDRESS: She's been bubbling with gratitude ever since. 
KIRK: Sit down. Tell him. Tell him, Harry. 
MUDD: Ah. Yes, well. 
KIRK: The Venus drugs, Harry. 
CHILDRESS: Venus drug? I've heard of it but, it's not just one of those stories? 
KIRK: Oh, it exists, illegally. 
MUDD: Well, actually, you see, it's a relatively harmless drug. 
EVE: Harmless! 
MUDD: Well, what it does is give you more of whatever you have. Well, with men, it makes them more muscular. Women, rounder. Men, more aggressive. Women, more feminine, and 
KIRK: He gave it to the women before you met them. 
CHILDRESS: Does that mean the others? They really look like she does? 
MUDD: Mister Childress, I 
CHILDRESS: Is that what it means? 
EVE: Yes, that's what it means! 
CHILDRESS: What happened to my partners? 
KIRK: They've left for their quarters during the storm, Childress. They're married. Subspace radio marriage. It was a fraud. They can get out of it. 
MUDD: If they want to. 
CHILDRESS: Why? 
MUDD: You can't condemn the women. 
CHILDRESS: I can! A man goes out and fights, almost dies. We all almost die. We should have, but we didn't. And now that we've got the good life in our hands, you bring us women for wives that 
EVE: You don't want wives, you want this. This is what you want, Mister Childress. I hope you remember it and dream about it, because you can't have it. It's not real! (takes the pills) Is this the kind of wife you want, Ben? Not someone to help you, not a wife to cook and sew and cry and need, but this kind. Selfish, vain, useless. Is this what you really want? All right, then. Here it is. 
KIRK: Quite a woman, eh, Childress? 
CHILDRESS: A fake, pumped up by a drug. 
KIRK: By herself. She took no drug. 
EVE: I swallowed it. 
KIRK: Coloured gelatin. 
MUDD: Yes, they took away my drug and substituted that. 
EVE: But that can't be. 
KIRK: There's only one kind of woman. 
MUDD: Or man, for that matter. 
KIRK: You either believe in yourself, or you don't. All right Childress, I've gone as far with you as I intend to. I want those lithium crystals and I want them now. Enterprise, this is Kirk. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here, Captain. 
KIRK: Stand by. Do I beam down a search party? 
CHILDRESS: No, the crystals are here, and you're welcome to them. 
KIRK: Stand by, Mister Spock. We're coming aboard with the lithium crystals. 
SPOCK [OC]: How many coming, Captain? 
CHILDRESS: Eve will stay, today at least. We, er, we want to talk. 
KIRK: Eve? 
EVE: You've got someone up there called the Enterprise. 
KIRK: Two of us, Mister Spock. Come on, Mister Mudd. 
MUDD: Don't you think you could possibly, by accident, arrange to leave me behind here? On this planet that would be punishment enough. 
KIRK: I can't do that, Harry, but I will appear as a character witness at your trial. If you think that'll help. 
MUDD: They'll throw away the key.

[Bridge]

MCCOY: That must have been quite a talk you made down there. Ever try considering the patent medicine business? 
KIRK: Why should I work your side of the street? 
SPOCK: I'm happy the affair is over. A most annoying emotional episode. 
MCCOY: Smack right in the old heart. Oh, I'm sorry. In your case, it would be about here. 
SPOCK: The fact that my internal arrangement differs from yours, Doctor, pleases me no end. 
FARRELL: Course plotted and all systems in operation. 
SULU: Engines engaged. Helm answering. 
FARRELL: Out of orbit, sir. 
KIRK: Ahead full. 
SULU: Ahead full, sir.

[Bridge]
CREWMAN [OC]: All sections, security check in progress. Report. Forward phaser 
KIRK: We're entering standard orbit, Nurse. It won't be much longer. 
CREWMAN [OC]: Forward scanner to Bridge.
KIRK: I understand you gave up a career in bio-research to sign aboard a starship.
CHAPEL: I know he's alive down there, Captain. 
CREWMAN 2 [OC]: Aft scanner to Bridge, Status report, please. Engineering controls 
KIRK: It's been five years since his last message. 
CHAPEL: Roger's a very determined man. He'd find a way to live. 
UHURA: Beginning signals to surface, sir. 
KIRK: Put it on all frequencies, Lieutenant. 
SPOCK: Ship's record banks show little we don't already know about this planet, Captain. Gravity is one point one of Earth, atmosphere within safety limits.
KIRK: But the surface temperature of that planet is one hundred degrees below zero. 
SPOCK: It may have been inhabited once, but the sun in this system has been fading steadily for a half million years. Now, Doctor Korby, often called the Pasteur of archaeological medicine. His translation of medical records from the Orion ruins revolutionised our immunisation techniques. 
KIRK: Required reading at the academy, Mister Spock. I've always wanted to meet him. Do you think there's any chance of him still being alive? 
UHURA: I've tried all frequencies, sir. No return signal. 
KIRK: Keep trying. 
CREWMAN [OC]: Warp capacity point zero seven and building. 
CREWMAN 2 [OC]: Communicator, we need more lines to the impulse deck.
CHAPEL: His last signal told about finding underground caverns. 
KIRK: And since then two expeditions have failed to find him. 
UHURA: I've run all frequencies a second time. There's no 
KORBY [OC]: Enterprise, come in, Enterprise. This is Roger Korby. Repeating, this is Doctor Roger Korby. Do you read me, Enterprise? This is Doctor Roger Korby standing by.

Captain's log, Stardate 2712.4. A signal from planet Exo 3. Doctor Roger Korby has been located, he and part of his expedition remaining alive due to the discovery of underground ruins Ieft by the former inhabitants of this world.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Enterprise to Korby. We have your co-ordinates pin-pointed. We're preparing to beam down a party. It may interest you that we have aboard this vessel 
KORBY [OC]: I've a rather unusual request, Captain Kirk. Beam down alone, just yourself. We've made discoveries of such a nature they may require an extraordinary decision from you. 
SPOCK: That's an unusual request. 
KIRK: The man making it is Doctor Roger Korby. 
SPOCK: You're certain you recognise his voice? 
CHAPEL: Have you ever been engaged, Mister Spock? Yes, it's Roger. 
KIRK: Agreed, Doctor. However, there will be two of us. 
CHAPEL: Hello, Roger.
KORBY [OC]: Christine! 
CHAPEL: Yes, Roger. 
KORBY [OC]: Darling, how, Where are you? Yes, yes, by all means, Captain. I, I had no idea, no hope. Darling, are you all right? 
CHAPEL: Yes, Roger. Everything's all right now.
KIRK: We're on our way, Doctor. We'll be with you in a moment. Enterprise out.

[Transporter room]

KIRK: Energise.

[Tunnel entrance]

CHAPEL: He said he'd be waiting. KIRK: Doctor Korby? Doctor Korby. It's possible we may have hit the wrong entry point. Kirk to Enterprise. 
SPOCK [OC]: Spock here, Captain.
KIRK: Beam down two security men. 
SPOCK [OC]: Any problems, Captain? 
KIRK: Some delay in meeting us. Probably nothing at all. Kirk out. Corridors could be quite deep. Getting here may have taken more time than he estimated. Don't worry. 
CHAPEL: Thank you. 
KIRK: Rayburn, maintain post here. 
RAYBURN: Yes, sir. 
KIRK: Matthews, we'll look for Doctor Korby. Accompany us. 
MATTHEWS: Yes, sir.

[Tunnels]

(the trio go deeper into the tunnel complex, until Chapel slips at the edge of a deep pit. Further on they come to a bright light. A figure steps in front of it) 
KIRK: Is that you, Doctor Korby? 
CHAPEL: Doctor Brown! It's Roger's assistant. Brownie, where's Roger? 
(a man screams, they dash back to the pit. A figure is creeping away, unseen) 
BROWN: Be careful. 
KIRK: Is there a path down there? 
BROWN: There's no hope, Captain. It's bottomless. He must have slipped. 
KIRK: Any chance of a projection or a ledge? 
BROWN: None, Captain. Unfortunate. Terribly unfortunate. Doctor Korby was detained. I came as soon as I could. 
KIRK: Not soon enough. 
CHAPEL: Brownie, what is it? 
BROWN: Explain. 
CHAPEL: Don't you recognise me? 
BROWN: Christine. You look well. My name is Brown, Doctor Korby's assistant. I presume you are Captain Kirk. He's dead, I assure you. Come, Doctor Korby will be waiting. 
KIRK: You do know him well? An old friend? 
CHAPEL: I suppose living here for five years. 
KIRK: Captain Kirk to Rayburn. Report. 
RAYBURN [OC]: All quiet here at the entry, Captain.

[Tunnel entrance]

RAYBURN: Any problems there, sir? 
KIRK [OC]: We lost Matthews. Apparently an accident. Tell the Enterprise to have a full security party standing by. 
RAYBURN: Yes, sir. 
KIRK [OC]: And we'll both report in at hourly intervals. If you and I lose contact, or if he fails to hear from either of us, he's to beam the security party down immediately. Kirk out. 
(the figure creeps up on Rayburn and attacks him)

[Tunnels]

BROWN: Doctor Korby has discovered that as their sun dimmed, the inhabitants of this planet moved underground from an open environment to this dark world. When you were a student of his, Christine, you must have often heard Doctor Korby remark how freedom of movement and choice produced the human spirit. The culture of Exo 3 proved his theory. When they moved from light to darkness, they replaced freedom with a mechanistic culture. Doctor Korby has been able to uncover elements of this culture which will revolutionise the universe when freed from this cavernous environment.

[Korby's study]

ANDREA: I'm Andrea. You must be Christine. I've always thought how beautiful your name is. And you must be Captain Kirk of the Starship Enterprise. We appreciate you bringing Roger's fiancee to him. 
CHAPEL: I don't remember Doctor Korby mentioning an Andrea. 
ANDREA: But you are exactly as Roger described you. No wonder he missed you so. 
KIRK: Where is Doctor Korby? 
KORBY: Here, Captain. I, I've been looking forward to (sees Chapel, and they kiss) 
CHAPEL: Oh, I knew I'd find you. 
KORBY: Everything's all right now. Oh, forgive me, Captain. I'm, er, I'm Roger Korby. 
KIRK: There's no need to apologise, sir, and certainly no need to introduce yourself. 
BROWN: The captain lost a man in the caverns, Doctor. 
KORBY: What? How did it happen? 
BROWN: The pit near the outer junction. The edge must have given way. 
KORBY: I'm terribly sorry, Captain. Perhaps if I'd been there. I know the passages so well. 
KIRK: It wasn't your fault. Kirk to Rayburn, report. I'm required to make a security confirmation. When I call my ship, if you list your personnel, cargo requirements, any special needs 
KORBY: Captain, I'd much prefer 
KIRK: Rayburn, are you receiving? 
KORBY: I'd prefer you waited, Captain, please, till I've talked to you. 
KIRK: I've lost contact with my guard. I'm required to call my ship. 
BROWN: No communications, Captain. (holding weapon) 
CHAPEL: Roger. 
KORBY: I'm sorry. If they should send down more people, 
CHAPEL: Roger, that 
KORBY: He won't be harmed. I promise you. Isn't it possible there could be things here unknown to you, so terribly important 
KIRK: Sir, one man is dead. I've lost contact with the other. 
KORBY: Andrea. 
KIRK: What are you doing? 
KORBY: This is necessary, Captain. You will understand. Andrea. (she reaches for Kirk's phaser, but he grabs her to use as a shield and aims it at Brown instead, while moving towards a table to use as a barrier instead of the girl) 
KIRK: Drop it! (he fires, Brown falls straight backwards and the big figure bursts in and lifts Kirk off his feet. Chapel screams as she sees the hole in Brown reveals electronic parts)

[Bridge]

KIRK [OC]: Enterprise from Captain Kirk. Come in. Do you read? 
UHURA: Frequency open, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Spock here, Captain. 
KIRK [OC]: Contact established with Doctor Korby. 
SPOCK: We were becoming concerned, Captain. Your check-in was overdue and since we'd not heard from your security team 
KIRK [OC]: No problem, Mister Spock. Bear with me.

[Korby's study]

RUK [Kirk's voice]: We'll return to the ship within forty eight hours. Doctor Korby's records and specimens will require careful packing.

[Bridge]

SPOCK: Captain, are you all right? You sound tired.

[korby's study]

KORBY: If you move or cry out, Ruk may injure you. At least wait until we can talk. 
SPOCK [OC]: Acknowledge, Captain. Is everything all right? 
RUK [Kirk's voice]: Fine, Mister Spock. Doctor Korby has made some fascinating discoveries. All under control. Stand by for regular contact. Kirk out. 
KORBY: This is not a vain display, Captain. I'm a scientist. You obviously know my reputation. Trust me. 
KIRK: Yes, I know your reputation. The whole galaxy knows who you are and what you stand for. That's why all this makes no sense. 
KORBY: There's so much you must learn Before you make a final judgment. For example (to Ruk) Andrea. 
RUK [Andrea's Voice]: You must be Captain Kirk of the Starship Enterprise. [Korby's Voice] Christine, it's all right now. 
KORBY: You see, Captain? 
RUK [Christine's Voice]: Yes Roger, everything is all right now. 
KORBY: That's enough. You are not to mock Christine. You will never harm her. 
KIRK: Or disobey an order from her. 
KORBY: You will not disobey her orders. Satisfied, Captain Kirk? Both love and trust. Now, give me twenty four hours to convince you. 
KIRK: Doctor, do I need to be a prisoner to be convinced? 
KORBY: What would your first duty be upon return to your vessel? Report! Do you realise the number of discoveries lost because of superstition, of ignorance, of a layman's inability to comprehend? 
KIRK: A simple layman's question, Doctor. Where is my other crewman? Alive? Dead? 
KORBY: Ruk was programmed to protect my experiments. The logic of his machine mind saw danger to me. 
KIRK: Where is my other crewman? 
KORBY: Ruk destroyed them both, totally against my wishes I assure you. 
KIRK: He's an android like Brown? 
RUK: More complex than Brown. Much superior. I was left here by the old ones. 
KORBY: Ruk was still tending the machinery when we arrived here. How many centuries? Even Ruk doesn't know. With his help, ith the records I could find, we built Brown. 
KIRK: You've convinced me, Doctor. You've convinced me that you're dangerous. (makes a run for it but Ruk grabs him and throws him around) 
KORBY: Ruk, no!

[Dining room]

ANDREA: I do not understand. Why are you unhappy? You are with Roger again. 
CHAPEL: Where is Captain Kirk? 
ANDREA: You are concerned about the captain?
CHAPEL: Yes, I am concerned.
ANDREA: How can you love Roger without trusting him? Why does it bother you when I use the name Roger?
KORBY: Andrea, it's sufficient that it does disturb her. You will call me Doctor Korby from now on, Andrea.
ANDREA: Yes, Doctor Korby. I didn't mean to eavesdrop, darling. As you can see, Captain Kirk is fine. He won't be harmed. The things at stake here simply make it necessary he doesn't send a report to his ship. I need time to explain and demonstrate to him and to you. Now shall we start with Andrea?
CHAPEL: Yes, let's start with Andrea.
ANDREA: I'm like Doctor Brown, an android. Didn't you know?
KORBY: Remarkable, isn't she? Notice the the lifelike pigmentation, the variation in skin tones. The flesh, the flesh has warmth. There's even a pulse, physical sensation.
CHAPEL: How convenient.
KORBY: Christine, you must realise an android's like a computer. It does only what I programme. As a trained scientist yourself, you must realise that 
CHAPEL: Given a mechanical Doctor Brown, a mechanical geisha would be no more difficult.
KORBY: You think I could love a machine?
CHAPEL: Did you?
KORBY: Andrea's incapable of that. She simply obeys orders. She has no meaning for me. There's no emotional bond. Andrea, kiss Captain Kirk. Now strike him. You see? There's no emotion in it, no emotional involvement. She simply responds to orders. She's a totally logical computer. A thing is not a woman. Now do you understand? 
KIRK: If these mechanical things have no feelings and perform only as you programme them, then why did Brown try to shoot me? Why did he kill two of my men? There are many things I don't understand, Doctor.
KORBY: I will answer all of your questions now.

[Laboratory]

KORBY: This is how you make an android. (Kirk is naked on one side of circular table, a human-shaped blob on the other) Andrea. (the table starts turning) He's not being harmed, I promise. 
CHAPEL: Roger, what's happened to you? When I sat in your class, you wouldn't even dream of harming an insect or an animal. Their life was sacred to you then. 
KORBY: Christine, if I'd simply beamed up to their vessel with Brown and the others, I'd have given them objects of curiosity, beginnings of wild stories, foolish theories. Ruk! Watch carefully. (the blob turns into Kirk, and the table is stopped) Choose, Christine. Which is your captain? 
CHAPEL: I don't know. They're exact. I honestly don't know. 
KORBY: Synthetic organs are in place. We merely synchronise them with Kirk's autonomic nervous system, duplicating the rhythms of his body. At the same time, we duplicate the mental pattern. Now, physical pattern complete, we now make a mental pattern. Ready for final synaptic fusion. Andrea, stand by for cortex circuits. The android will be so perfect It could even replace the captain. The same memories, the same attitudes, the same abilities. Activate circuits. 
KIRK: Mind your own business, Mister Spock. I'm sick of your half-breed interference, do you hear? Mind your own business, Mister Spock. I'm sick of your half-breed (passes out, the other one wakes up) 
KORBY: Complete. 
CHAPEL: Are you all right? 
KIRK: As far as I know. 
KORBY: Now, meet an android. 
KIRK2: How do you do, Miss Chapel?

[Dining room]

ANDREA: I am now programmed to please you also. Is the food appealing?
CHAPEL: Yes, thank you.
ANDREA: Please sit, Captain. 
KIRK2: Thank you. I'm more or less on parole, I understand.
ANDREA: Doctor Korby suggested that you have lunch. He thought you might have a few things to talk about.
CHAPEL: Captain. 
KIRK2: I know, I know. I'd hate to be torn between commander and fiance myself.
CHAPEL: No, I'm not torn. I'm puzzled. I'm worried. 
KIRK2: Has he confided in you? 
CHAPEL: Nothing he hasn't told you. I know it doesn't make sense. What he's done may seem wrong, but he is Roger Korby, whatever he seems to be doing. 
KIRK2: Unless something's gone wrong with his mind. 
CHAPEL: No. You're forgetting how well I know him. He's as sane as you or I. 
KIRK2: Nurse, if I gave you a direct order to betray him 
CHAPEL: Please, don't ask me to make that choice. I'd much rather you push me off the same precipice where Matthews died. Oh, I can't. (pushes plate away) Please, go ahead and eat. 
KIRK2: Androids don't eat, Miss Chapel. 
KORBY: He even has your sense of humour. 
KIRK: Well, there's one difference between us. I'm hungry. 
KIRK2: The difference is your weakness, Captain, not mine. 
KORBY: One at a time, gentlemen. Captain? 
KIRK: Eating is a pleasure, sir. Unfortunately, one you will never know. 
KIRK2: Perhaps, but I will never starve, sir. 
KIRK: He's an exact duplicate? 
KORBY: In every detail. 
KIRK: What about memory? Tell me about Sam. 
KIRK2: George Samuel Kirk, your brother. Only you call him Sam. 
KIRK: He saw me off on this mission. 
KIRK2: Yes, with his wife and three sons. 
KIRK: He said he was being transferred to Earth colony two research station. 
KIRK2: No, Captain. He said he was continuing his research and that he wanted to be transferred to Earth colony two. 
KORBY: You might as well try to outthink a calculating machine. 
KIRK: Obviously, I can't, but we do have some interesting differences. 
KORBY: Totally unimportant ones. You may leave now. (Kirk2 leaves) You haven't guessed the rest? Not even you, Christine? What you saw was only a machine, Only half of what I could've accomplished, Do you understand? By continuing the process I could've transferred you, your very consciousness into that android. Your soul, if you wish. All of you. In android form, a human being can have practical immortality. Can you understand what I'm offering mankind? 
KIRK: Programming. Different word, but the same old promises made by Genghis Khan, Julius Caesar, Hitler, Ferris, Maltuvis. 
KORBY: Can you understand that a human converted to an android can be programmed for the better? Can you imagine how life could be improved if we could do away with jealousy, greed, hate? 
KIRK: It can also be improved by eliminating love, tenderness, sentiment. The other side of the coin, Doctor. 
KORBY: No one need ever die again. No disease, no deformities. why even fear can be programmed away, replaced with joy. I'm offering you a pracical heaven, a new paradise, and all I need is your help. 
KIRK: All you wanted before was my understanding. 
KORBY: I need transportation to a planet colony with proper raw materials. I'm sure there are several good possibilities among your next stops. No diversion from your route. I want no suspicions aroused. I'll begin producing androids carefully, selectively. 
KIRK: Yes, yes. No one need know, only to frighten uninformed minds. 
KORBY: They must be strongly infiltrated into society before the android existence is revealed. I want no wave of hysteria to destroy what is good and right. You with me, Captain? 
KIRK: You've created your own Kirk. Why do you need me? 
KORBY: I created him to impress you, not to replace you. 
KIRK: I'm impressed, Doctor, but not the way you think! (leaps up with cord he's untied from the chair leg and loops it around Korby's throat) Stand back, Ruk! I'll kill him! Stay back. (goes through door, releasing Korby into Ruk's arms) 
KORBY: Ruk, protect! 
CHAPEL: Roger, I. Ruk, no! (runs after him)

[Tunnels]

CHAPEL: Ruk, stop! Doctor Korby said you are to obey me! Ruk! Ruk! Ruk, I order you not to harm him!

(Kirk breaks off a stalactite to use as a club. RUk hears the sound) 
RUK [Chapel's Voice]: Captain Kirk, where are you? Captain Kirk! I can help you! 
KIRK: Christine, is that you? 
(Ruk sneaks up and they struggle, ending up with Kirk dangling from the edge of the pit. After thinking about it, Ruk pulls him up to safety)

[Corridor]

SPOCK: Captain!

[Bedroom]

SPOCK: Captain, We finished ahead of schedule. 
KIRK2: Doctor Korby has considerable cargo to beam aboard. I'll have to go over our destination schedule with him. 
SPOCK: You're going back down with the command pack? 
KIRK2: Mind your own business, Mister Spock. I'm sick of your half-breed interference, do you hear? 
SPOCK: Yes. very well, Captain. 
KIRK2: You look upset, Mister Spock. Is everything all right up here? 
SPOCK: No problems here, sir. 
KIRK2: Good. I'll beam up shortly with Doctor Korby and party. (leaves) 
SPOCK: Security, Spock here. Status of your landing party? 
SECURITY [OC]: Ready and standing by, sir, 
SPOCK: Have them meet me in the transporter room after the Captain has beamed down.

[Korby's study]

KIRK2: I looked it over. I think you'll find planet Midas Five an excellent choice. 
KORBY: A small colony. Abundant raw materials. You made a good beginning, Captain. 
KIRK2: Thank you. I felt quite at home on the Enterprise.

[Bedroom]

KIRK: Andrea, kiss me. (she does, then raises her arm to slap him. He stops her and pulls her in for a passionate embrace)
ANDREA: No. Not programmed for you.
KIRK: What's the matter, Andrea? Confused? 
ANDREA: No. (leaves. Ruk blocks Kirk's attempt to leave) 
KIRK: Emotion, Ruk? You disapprove of Miss Chapel's orders to save my life? 
RUK: To maintain your existence would be illogical.
KIRK: Why? Can't your memory banks solve a simple equation like that? What happened to the old ones, Ruk? 
RUK: So long ago. 
KIRK: Is it possible they built their machines too well, gave them pride and a desire to survive? Machines that wanted logic and order and found that frustrated by the illogical emotional creatures that built them? 
RUK: Yes, the old ones. The ones who made us. They grew fearful of us. They began to turn us off. 
KIRK: And isn't it Korby who's creating the same danger to you all over again? Unlike you, we humans are full of unpredictable emotions that logic cannot solve. 
RUK: Yes. Yes, it had been so long ago, I had forgotten. The old ones here. The ones who made us, yes. Yes, it is still in my memory banks. It became necessary to destroy them. You are inconsistent. You cannot be programmed. You are inferior. 
KIRK: And Korby?
RUK: You came from the outside. You bring disorder here. 
KIRK: The danger to you is Korby. 
RUK: I was programmed by Korby. I cannot harm him. 
KIRK: The old ones programmed you, too, but it became possible to destroy them.
RUK: That was the equation! (seizes Kirk) Existence! Survival must cancel out programming.
KIRK: That's it, Ruk! Logic! You can't protect someone who's trying to destroy you! 
KORBY: Ruk, I would like 
RUK: You brought him among us. You brought the inferior ones. We had cleansed ourselves of them. Now you bring the evil back!
KORBY: Ruk, stop! Your programming. (fires phaser, Ruk vanishes) I had no choice.

[Corridor]

KIRK: You were a man with respect for all things alive. How can I explain the change in you? If I was to tell Earth I was in your hands, to tell them what has become (jumps Korby and traps his arm in a door. The skin tears to reveal electronics)

[Korby's study]

KORBY: It's still me, Christine. Roger. I'm in here. You can't imagine how it was. I was frozen, dying. My legs were gone. I was, I had only my brain between life and death. This can be repaired easier than another man can set a broken finger. I'm still the same as I was before, Christine, perhaps even better.
CHAPEL: Are you, Roger? 
KORBY: (into comm. unit) Andrea.
ANDREA [OC]: Yes, Doctor. 
KORBY: There's someone in the outer junction. 
KIRK: Spock. He must've got my message. 
ANDREA [OC]: I will find Ruk. 
CHAPEL: But he'll never find us in this maze. 
KORBY: Ruk has been shut off.

[Laboratory]

KORBY [OC]: Get a weapon. Deal with it. Protect.

[Corridor outside laboratory]

ANDREA: I will kiss you.
KIRK2: No. 
ANDREA: You, you will not?
KIRK2: It is illogical. (she disintegrates him)

[Korby's study]

KORBY: I'm the same! A direct transfer. All of me, human, rational, and without a flaw. 
ANDREA: He freed himself, and I destroyed, (sees Kirk there) destroyed him. I am not programmed for alarms. I listened to your instructions. They were mis-stated. 
KIRK: She killed the android, Korby, the same way you killed Ruk. Is this your perfect world, your flawless beings killing off one another? Aren't you doing exactly what you hate most in humans, killing with no more concern than when you turn off a light? 
KORBY: I'm not a computer. Test me. Ask me to solve any, equate, transmit. Christine, Christine, let me prove myself. Does this make such a difference?
CHAPEL: Don't you see, Roger? Everything you've done has proved it isn't you.
KORBY: I am Roger Korby!
KIRK: Then prove it. Give me that phaser gun. If there's any human left in you, give it to me.
KORBY: No. You will never understand. I constructed a perfect being, tested it, proved it. Proved it. Proved it? (hands phaser to Kirk) 
KIRK: Andrea, give me the weapon.
ANDREA: No. Protect. Protect. (to Korby) To love you. To, to kiss you. 
KORBY: No. You cannot love. You're not human.
ANDREA: Love you. Kiss. (Korby reaches for trigger and disintegrates them both)
SPOCK [OC}: Captain Kirk! 
KIRK: In here, Spock.
SPOCK: Captain, are you all right? Nurse? Where's Doctor Korby?
KIRK: Doctor Korby was never here.

[Bridge]

CHAPEL: Thank you for letting me make the decision, Captain. I'm quite certain I'm doing the right thing. (leaves) 
KIRK: She's staying with the ship. Something bothering you, Mister Spock?
SPOCK: Frankly, I was rather dismayed by your use of the term half-breed, Captain. You must admit it is an unsophisticated expression. 
KIRK: I'll remember that Mister Spock, the next time I find myself in a similar situation. Steady as we go, helm.

[Bridge]

SPINELLI: Coming up on it fast, sir. 
KIRK: Are you certain of your sensor readings? 
SPOCK: Definitely a space vessel of some type. 
KIRK: Origin? 
SPOCK: Unknown. It could hardly be an Earth ship. There have been no flights into this sector for years. 
UHURA: I'm picking up a signal, sir. (a series of beeps comes over the speakers) Captain, that's the old Morse code call signal. 
KIRK: Thank you. 
UHURA: CQ. CQ. 
KIRK: We're reading it, Lieutenant. I thought you said it couldn't possibly be an Earth vessel. 
SPOCK: I fail to understand why it always gives you pleasure to see me proven wrong. 
KIRK: An emotional Earth weakness of mine. There it is. 
(The ship appears on the viewscreen.) 
KIRK: An old Earth vessel, similar to the DY=500 class. 
SPOCK: Much older. DY-100 class, to be exact. Captain, the last such vessel was built centuries ago, back in the 1990s. 
KIRK: Then it's a derelict, its signal left on automatic. 
SPOCK: Or an old Earth ship being used by aliens. 
KIRK: Weapons status. 
WEAPONS [OC]: Deflector shields on maximum. Phasers manned, sir. 
KIRK: Bioscanners report. 
MCCOY [OC]: Life science bioscanners are picking up heart beats from over there. Can't be human, though. They're too faint, and average only four beats per minute. 
SPOCK: Sensor reading, Captain. Some sort of equipment functioning on that vessel. 
KIRK: All decks go to full alert. 
(Enterprise comes alongside the smaller ship, which is still as big as the engineering hull.

Captain's log, stardate 3141.9. A full hour has elapsed since interception of the strange vessel. Our presence alongside is still being completely ignored. Although our sensors continue to show signs of equipment and life aboard, there has been no indication of danger to us.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Weapons department, maintain battle stations. All other decks standby alert. 
UHURA: All decks acknowledging, sir. 
MCCOY: We're continuing to pick up some form of heart action over there. Very faint, very slow. Seems to be coming from about sixty or seventy bodies, as near as I can tell. 
KIRK: Alien bodies, Bones? 
MCCOY: Could be. There's no sign of breathing or other form of respiration. 
SPOCK: Hull surface is pitted with meteor scars. However, scanners make out a name. SS Botany Bay. 
KIRK: Then you can check the registry. 
SPOCK: No such vessel listed. Records of that period are fragmentary, however. The mid=1990s was the era of your last so-called World War. 
MCCOY: The Eugenics Wars. 
SPOCK: Of course. Your attempt to improve the race through selective breeding. 
MCCOY: Now, wait a minute. Not our attempt, Mister Spock. A group of ambitious scientists. I'm sure you know the type. Devoted to logic, completely unemotional 
KIRK: All right, all right, gentlemen. As you were. Rig for tractor beam, Helm. Lock onto that vessel. 
SPINELLI: Rigging for tractor beam, sir. 
KIRK: The Bridge is yours, Mister Spock. Care to join the landing party, Doctor? 
MCCOY: Well, if you're actually giving me a choice 
KIRK: I'm not. Oh, I'll need somebody familiar with the late 20th-Century Earth. Here's a chance for that historian to do something for a change. What's her name? McIvers? 
SPOCK: Lieutenant McGivers.

[McGiver's quarters]

(Lt McGivers is just about to settle down to some painting, when) 
SPOCK [OC]: Attention. The following personnel report to transporter room. Engineering Officer Scott, Lieutenant McGivers. Acknowledge. 
MARLA: McGivers. On my way.

[Transporter room]

SCOTT: Well, it looks like that ship was expecting us. We read heat coming on, complete oxygen atmosphere. 
KIRK: Very interesting. You ready, Bones? MCCOY: No. I signed aboard this ship to practice medicine, not to have my atoms scattered back and forth across space by this gadget. 
KIRK: You're an old-fashioned boy, McCoy. Where's that historian? (McGivers enters) Come on, Lieutenant 
MARLA: McGivers, sir. 
KIRK: Energise.

[SS Botany Bay]

(Men and women are lying in clear-sided compartments, seemingly asleep.) KIRK: Scotty? 
SCOTT: Definitely Earth-type mechanism, sir. Twentieth century vessel. Old type atomic power. Bulky, solid. I think they used to call them transistor units. I'd love to tear this baby apart. 
MARLA: Captain, it's a sleeper ship. 
KIRK: Suspended animation. 
MARLA: I've seen old photographs of this. Necessary because of the time involved in space travel until about the year 2018. It took years just to travel from one planet to another. 
KIRK: Is it possible they're still alive after centuries of travel? 
MCCOY: It's theoretically possible. I've never heard of it being tested for this long a period. 
MARLA: What a handsome group of people. 
MCCOY: Jim, I have a new reading. The lights must have triggered some mechanism. 
MARLA: Captain, look here. 
(They go to the compartment holding a dark-haired man.) 
KIRK: Scotty? 
SCOTT: Beats me what's happening. 
MCCOY: We've triggered something, all right. His heart beat's increasing. Now passing eight beats per minute. There are some signs of respiration beginning. 
SCOTT: This one was probably programmed to be triggered first. 
KIRK: Could he be the leader? The leader. Lieutenant? 
MARLA: (dragging herself back from just gazing at the man) Yes, sir. The leader was often set to revive first. This would allow him to decide whether the conditions warranted revival of the others. 
MCCOY: Heart beat now approaching forty per minute. The respiration pattern is firming up. 
MARLA: From the northern India area, I'd guess. Probably a Sikh. They were the most fantastic warriors. 
MCCOY: Heart beat now fifty two and increasing. 
KIRK: The others? 
SCOTT: There's no change, and they're mixed types. Western, mid-European, Latin, Oriental. 
MARLA: A man from the twentieth century coming alive. 
MCCOY: Maybe. Heart beat dropping. 
KIRK: Circuit shorting. 
SCOTT: Probably some dust. 
MCCOY: Heartbeat now thirty, dropping fast. It's a heart flutter. He's dying. 
MARLA: Do something, Captain. 
KIRK: Can we? 
SCOTT: It'd take an hour to figure it out. 
KIRK: What happens if we get him out of there? 
MCCOY: He'll die in seconds if we don't. 
(Kirk uses something metal in his hand to break the glass and open the compartment. The man is slid out on a trolley, gasping and awake. He tries to speak.) 
KHAN: How long? 
KIRK: How long have you been sleeping? Two centuries we estimate. Landing party to Enterprise. Come in. 
UHURA: Go ahead, boarding party. We read you. 
KIRK: Lock in on McCoy's beam. He's transporting back with a casualty we discovered here. 
MARLA: Magnificent.

Captain's log, supplemental. Alongside the SS Botany Bay for ten hours now. A boarding party of engineering and medical specialists are now completing their examination of the mysterious vessel. Attempts to revive other sleepers await our success or failure with the casualty already beamed over. Doctor McCoy is frankly amazed at his physical and recuperative power.

[Bridge]

KIRK: Kirk to boarding party. 
SCOTT [OC]: Scott here. 
KIRK: Scotty, any records, log books of any kind?

[SS Botany Bay]

SCOTT: Negative, Captain. It appears they were in suspended animation when the ship took off.

KIRK: How many alive? 
SCOTT [OC]: Twelve units have malfunctioned, leaving seventy two still operating. Thirty of those are women. 
KIRK: Kirk out. Seventy two alive. A group of people dating back to the 1990s. A discovery of some importance, Mister Spock. There are a great many unanswered questions about those years. 
SPOCK: A strange, violent period in your history. I find no record what so ever of an SS Botany Bay. Captain, the DY-100 class vessel was designed for interplanetary travel only. With simple nuclear-powered engines, star travel was considered impractical at that time. It was ten thousand to one against their making it to another star system. And why no record of the trip? 
KIRK: Botany Bay. That was the name of a penal colony on shores of Australia, wasn't it? If they took that name for their vessel 
SPOCK: If you're suggesting this was a penal deportation vessel, you've arrived at a totally illogical conclusion. 
KIRK: Oh? 
SPOCK: Your Earth was on the verge of a dark ages. Whole populations were being bombed out of existence. A group of criminals could have been dealt with far more efficiently than wasting one of their most advanced spaceships. 
KIRK: Yes. So much for my theory. I'm still waiting to hear yours. 
SPOCK: Even a theory requires some facts, Captain. So far I have none. 
KIRK: And that irritates you, Mister Spock. 
SPOCK: Irritation? 
KIRK: Yeah. 
SPOCK: I am not capable of that emotion. 
KIRK: My apologies, Mister Spock. You suspect some danger in them? 
SPOCK: Insufficient facts always invites danger, Captain. 
KIRK: Well, we'd better get some facts. Rig for towing. 
SPINELLI: Aye, aye, sir. 
KIRK: Make course for Starbase Twelve. 
SPOCK: Aye, sir.

[Sickbay - medical ward]

(At Khan's bedside) 
MCCOY: (to nurse) That'll be all. (she leaves) 
KIRK: Bones? 
MCCOY: He'll live. 
KIRK: My compliments. 
MCCOY: No, I'm good, but not that good. There's something inside this man that refuses to accept death. Look at that. Even as he is now, his heart valve action has twice the power of yours and mine. Lung efficiency is fifty percent better. 
(McGivers enters) 
KIRK: An improved breed of human. That's what the Eugenics War was all about. 
MCCOY: I'd estimate he could lift us both with one arm. It will be interesting to see if his brain matches his body. 
MARLA: Doctor, will he live? 
MCCOY: It appears he will, Lieutenant. (leaves) 
KIRK: I'd like to talk to you. 
(They go out into the main area, where McCoy is at his desk) 
KIRK: If I were to rate your performance as a member of the landing party today I 
MARLA: I know, sir. I'm sorry. 
KIRK: Lieutenant, at any one time, the safety of this entire vessel might depend upon the performance of a single crewman, and the fact that you find a man strangely compelling to you personally 
MARLA: Not personally, Captain. Professionally. My profession is historian, and when I find a specimen from the past alive, I'm in the sheer delight of examining his mind. 
KIRK: And men were more adventuresome then. Bolder, more colourful. 
MARLA: Yes, sir, I think they were. 
KIRK: Good. If I can have honesty, it's easier to overlook mistakes. That's all. 
MARLA: Yes, sir. 
(She leaves) 
MCCOY: A pity you wasted your life on command, Jim. You'd have made a fair psychologist. 
KIRK: Fair? (leaves) 
(In the ward, Khan wakes, gets out of bed and does some stretches. He hears McCoy's voice.) 
MCCOY: Sickbay to lab. Anything new on those bios? 
LAB TECH [OC]: They all came out fine, Doctor. 
MCCOY: Good. McCoy out. 
(Khan sees a display of old medical instruments on the wall, takes a scalpel, and is back in bed when McCoy walks in to check on him. As the good doctor leans over, Khan grabs him by the throat and holds the blade to his neck.) 
MCCOY: Well, either choke me or cut my throat. Make up your mind. 
KHAN: English. I thought I dreamed hearing it. Where am I? 
MCCOY: You're in (a squeeze makes him lower his voice) You're in bed, holding a knife at your doctor's throat. 
KHAN: Answer my question. 
MCCOY: It would be most effective if you would cut the carotid artery, just under the left ear. 
(Khan releases him.) 
KHAN: I like a brave man. 
MCCOY: I was simply trying to avoid an argument. (takes the scalpel) You're aboard the United Spaceship Enterprise. Your vessel is in tow. 
KHAN: I remember a voice. Did I hear it say I had been sleeping for two centuries? 
MCCOY: That is correct. 
KHAN: Where is your Captain? I have many questions. 
(McCoy goes to the intercom) 
KIRK [OC]: Bridge. 
MCCOY: I have a patient here with many questions, Captain. 
KIRK [OC]: On my way. 
(A little later, and Khan is sitting up more) 
KIRK: James Kirk, commanding the starship Enterprise. 
KHAN: I see. 
KIRK: And your name? 
KHAN: I have a few questions first. What is your heading? 
KIRK: Our heading is Starbase Twelve, a planet in the Gamma 400 star system. Our command base in this sector. Is that of any use to you? 
KHAN: And my people? 
KIRK: Seventy two of your life-support canisters are still functioning. 
KHAN: You will revive them. 
KIRK: As soon as we reach Starbase Twelve. 
KHAN: I see. 
KIRK: And now 
KHAN: Khan is my name. 
KIRK: Khan. Nothing else? 
KHAN: Khan. 
KIRK: What was the exact date of your lift off? We know it was sometime in the early 1990s, but 
KHAN: I find myself growing fatigued, Doctor. May we continue this questioning at some other time? 
KIRK: The facts I need, Mister Khan, will take very little time. For example, the nature of your expedition. 
MCCOY: Jim. A little later might be better. 
KHAN: Captain, I wonder if I could have something to read during my convalescence. I was once an engineer of sorts. I would be most interested in studying the technical manuals on your vessel. 
KIRK: Yes, I understand. You have two hundred years of catching up to do. 
KHAN: Precisely. 
KIRK: They're available to any patient on the viewing screen. Doctor McCoy will show you how to tie into the library tapes. 
KHAN: Thank you, Captain. You are very co-operative.

[Bridge]

KIRK: This Khan is not what I expected of a twentieth century man. 
SPOCK: I note he's making considerable use of our technical library. 
KIRK: Common courtesy, Mister Spock. He'll spend the rest of his days in our time. It's only decent to help him catch up. Would you estimate him to be a product of selective breeding? 
SPOCK: There is that possibility, Captain. His age would be correct. In 1993, a group of these young supermen did seize power simultaneously in over forty nations. 
KIRK: Well, they were hardly supermen. They were aggressive, arrogant. They began to battle among themselves. 
SPOCK: Because the scientists overlooked one fact. Superior ability breeds superior ambition. 
KIRK: Interesting, if true. They created a group of Alexanders, Napoleons. 
SPOCK: I have collected some names and made some counts. By my estimate, there were some eighty or ninety of these young supermen unaccounted for when they were finally defeated. 
KIRK: That fact isn't in the history texts. 
SPOCK: Would you reveal to war-weary populations that some eighty Napoleons might still be alive?

[Sickbay - medical ward]

(Khan is lounging, showing off his chest and calves.) 
MARLA: Ship's historian, Lieutenant 
KHAN: Marla McGivers. 
MARLA: Yes. 
KHAN: I am told you participated in my rebirth. 
MARLA: In a small way. 
KHAN: I've been reading up on starships, but they have one luxury not mentioned in the manuals. 
MARLA: I don't understand. 
KHAN: A beautiful woman. My name is Khan. Please sit and entertain me. 
(She perches on another bed) 
MARLA: I'd like some historical information about your ship, its purpose and 
KHAN: And why do you wear your hair in such an uncomplimentary fashion? 
MARLA: It's comfortable. 
KHAN: But it's not attractive. (He takes her to a mirror and loosens a couple of strands at the back.) There. Soft. Natural. Simple. 
MARLA: Mister Khan, I'm here on business. 
KHAN: You find no pleasure here? 
MARLA: My interest is scientific. Men of. That is, the world of the past. I'm sure you understand to actually talk to a man of your century 
KHAN: There. Simple, soft. Please remember. 
MARLA: Perhaps some other time, when you feel more like talking about the past. 
KHAN: I'm glad you came. Please do it again.

[Officer's Mess]

(The dining table is laid out, and the senior staff are in dress uniform.) 
MCCOY: Very impressive. Are we expecting a fleet admiral for dinner? 
KIRK: Lieutenant McGivers' idea to welcome Khan to our century. Just how strongly is she attracted to him? 
MCCOY: Well, there aren't any regulations against romance, Jim. 
KIRK: My curiosity's official, not personal, Bones. 
MCCOY: Well, he has a magnetism. Almost electric. You felt it. And it could over power McGivers with her preoccupation with the past.

[McGiver's quarters]

(A crewwoman shows Khan in.) 
KHAN: Thank you. I hoped you might guide me to our dinner engagement. (sees a picture on the wall) Very good. Fine technique. 
MARLA: It's a gladiator named Flavius. He once 
KHAN: And you've rearranged your hair for me. Excellent. 
KHAN: All bold men from the past. Richard, Leif Ericson, Napoleon. A hobby of yours, such men? 
(He uncovers a work in progress - a man in a turban) 
KHAN: I am honoured. Thank you. But I caution you. Such men dare take what they want. 
(He kisses her, and she responds.)

[Officer's mess]

(After dinner, as liqueurs are being served.) 
KIRK: Forgive my curiosity, Mister Khan, but my officers are anxious to know more about your extraordinary journey. 
SPOCK: And how you managed to keep it out of the history books. 
KHAN: Adventure, Captain. Adventure. There was little else left on Earth. 
SPOCK: There was the war to end tyranny. Many considered that a noble effort. 
KHAN: Tyranny, sir? Or an attempt to unify humanity? 
SPOCK: Unify, sir? Like a team of animals under one whip? 
KHAN: I know something of those years. Remember, it was a time of great dreams, of great aspiration. 
SPOCK: Under dozens of petty dictatorships. 
KHAN: One man would have ruled eventually. As Rome under Caesar. Think of its accomplishments. 
SPOCK: Then your sympathies were with 
KHAN: You are an excellent tactician, Captain. You let your second in command attack while you sit and watch for weakness. 
KIRK: You have a tendency to express ideas in military terms, Mister Khan. This is a social occasion. 
KHAN: It has been said that social occasions are only warfare concealed. Many prefer it more honest, more open. 
KIRK: You fled. Why? Were you afraid? 
KHAN: I've never been afraid. 
KIRK: But you left at the very time mankind needed courage. 
KHAN: We offered the world order! 
KIRK: We? 
KHAN: Excellent. Excellent. But if you will excuse me, gentlemen and ladies, I grow fatigued again. With your permission, Captain, I will return to my quarters. 
(Kirk stands, and Khan leaves.)

[Khan's quarters]

(Khan is pacing when Marla enters.) 
MARLA: I wanted to apologise. They had no right to treat you that way. 
KHAN: Quite understandable, since I'm something of a mystery to them. 
MARLA: You're no mystery to me. I know exactly who you are. 
KHAN: Do you? 
MARLA: Leif Ericson, Richard the Lion Heart, Napoleon. I don't know if you're going to like living in our time. 
KHAN: Then I'll have to remold it to my liking. 
(Embraces her)
MARLA: Please don't. 
(Pushes her away.) 
KHAN: Go. Or stay. But do it because it is what you wish to do. Well? 
MARLA: I'll stay a little longer. 
KHAN: How many minutes do you graciously offer? 
MARLA: I only meant 
KHAN: This grows tiresome. You must now ask to stay. 
MARLA: I'd like to stay. Please. 
(He takes her hand, then forces her down onto her knees.) 
KHAN: Open your heart. Will you open your heart? 
MARLA: Yes. 
KHAN: I intend to take this ship. Do you agree? 
MARLA: Oh, please don't ask me 
KHAN: I need your help. 
MARLA: You won't harm anyone? 
KHAN: Now you question me? 
MARLA: No. 
KHAN: Will you assist me? 
MARLA: Oh, please, Khan, don't ask me 
KHAN: Leave me then. Go, I say. 
MARLA: No. I promise. I'll do anything you ask.

[Briefing room]

(A large picture of their guest in on a screen) 
KIRK: Name, Khan, as we know him today. (Spock changes the picture) Name, Khan Noonien Singh. 
SPOCK: From 1992 through 1996, absolute ruler of more than a quarter of your world. From Asia through the Middle East. 
MCCOY: The last of the tyrants to be overthrown. 
SCOTT: I must confess, gentlemen. I've always held a sneaking admiration for this one. 
KIRK: He was the best of the tyrants and the most dangerous. They were supermen, in a sense. Stronger, braver, certainly more ambitious, more daring. 
SPOCK: Gentlemen, this romanticism about a ruthless dictator is 
KIRK: Mister Spock, we humans have a streak of barbarism in us. Appalling, but there, nevertheless. 
SCOTT: There were no massacres under his rule. 
SPOCK: And as little freedom. 
MCCOY: No wars until he was attacked. 
SPOCK: Gentlemen. 
KIRK: Mister Spock, you misunderstand us. We can be against him and admire him all at the same time. 
SPOCK: Illogical. 
KIRK: Totally. This is the Captain. Put a twenty four hour security on Mister Khan's quarters, effective immediately.

[Khan's quarters]

(Khan is seated at a plain table, dressed in a red Enterprise uniform shirt, when Kirk bursts in and sits opposite him.) 
KHAN: I'm sorry, Captain. I was lost in thought. My door. Locked from outside, a guard posted. 
KIRK: Unusual treatment for Khan Noonien Singh. 
KHAN: Excellent. You identified me with your computer system, I imagine. 
KIRK: I'd like those answers now. First, the purpose of your star flight. 
KHAN: A new life, a chance to build a world. Other things I doubt you would understand. 
KIRK: Why? Because I'm not a product of controlled genetics? 
KHAN: Captain, although your abilities intrigue me, you are quite honestly inferior. Mentally, physically. In fact, I am surprised how little improvement there has been in human evolution. Oh, there has been technical advancement, but, how little man himself has changed. Yes, it appears we will do well in your century, Captain. Do you have any other questions? 
KIRK: Thank you. They've all been answered. 
(He leaves, and the guard resumes his post. Khan summons his strength, wrenches the locked door open and knocks out his guard with a single blow.)

[Transporter room]

(Marla is holding a phaser on the transporter chief.) 
MARLA: Move away. 
(Khan comes in and incapacitates him with pressure at the base of the skull. She beams him to the Botany Bay.)

[SS Botany Bay]

(Freshly revived supermen and women are stretching their muscles when Khan greets them.)
KHAN: Otto. Joaquin. The trip is over. The battle begins again. Only this time it's not a world we win. It's a universe. Kati.

[Bridge]

SPINELLI: On course, sir. Warp factor two. 
KIRK: Maintain. (he answers the intercom) Bridge. 
SECURITY [OC]: Captain, Security here. Khan's escaped. 
KIRK: Sound security alert. 
UHURA: Security alert, Captain. Communication channels are down, Captain. 
(Kirk heads to the lift, but the doors do not open) 
SPOCK: Turbo elevators inoperative. Jammed, Captain. 
(Kirk rushes to a panel on the far bulkhead and pushes buttons.) 
KIRK: Atmospheric controls cut off. 
SPOCK: Useless. They're on override in Engineering. 
KIRK: Engineering. Scotty. This is the Bridge.

[Engineering]

SCOTT: Captain! 
(He gets knocked out)

[Bridge]

KIRK: What's going on down there?

[Engineering]

KHAN: He's not able to answer you at the moment, Captain.

[Bridge]

KHAN [OC]: Your ship is mine. I have shut off the life-support system to your Bridge, and jammed up your exit routes. I am willing to negotiate. 
KIRK: Flood all decks with neural gas. 
SPOCK: Impossible. Intruder control systems inoperative. Mister Khan was very thorough in his study of our tech manuals. 
KIRK: Contact Starbase Twelve. 
UHURA: All channels are totally jammed, Captain. 
SPOCK: Brilliant. Every contingency anticipated. 
KHAN [OC]: Your air should be getting quite thin by now.

[Engineering]

KHAN: Do you surrender the Bridge?

[Bridge]

KIRK: Negative.

[Engineering]

KHAN: Academic, Captain. Refuse,

[Bridge]

KHAN [OC]: And every person on the Bridge will suffocate. 
(A little later, with everyone else unconscious, Kirk makes his last log entry.) 
Stardate 3142.8. They have my ship, discarding their own worthless vessel. Only moments of air left on the Bridge now. Commendations recommended for Lieutenant Uhura, Technicians First Class Thule and Harrison, Lieutenant Spinelli and, of course, Mister Spock. I take full responsibility. I take full (He passes out)

[Briefing room]

(The senior staff are awake again, and listening to a speech at gunpoint.) 
KHAN: Nothing ever changes, except man. Your technical accomplishments? Improve a mechanical device and you may double productivity. But improve man and you gain a thousand fold. I am such a man. Join me. I'll treat you well. I need your training to operate a vessel this complex. 
SCOTT: Where is Captain Kirk? 
KHAN: I see now I made one serious error. You are the Communications Officer? Engage the viewing screen, please. 
(Uhura doesn't move, so Joaquin drags her to the table, then hits her. As he raises his hand again, Marla intervenes.) 
MARLA: No! 
KHAN: I should have realised that suffocating together on the Bridge would create heroic camaraderie among you. But it is quite a different thing to watch it happening to someone else. Engage the viewing screen. I'm sure you recognise your medical decompression chamber here, Doctor. And the meaning of that indicator. (It is dropping to 10Hg) Your Captain will die. If you join me, Mister Spock, I will save his life. My vessel was useless. I need you and yours to select a colony planet. One with a population willing to be led by us. 
MCCOY: To be conquered by you. A starship would make that most simple, wouldn't it? 
KHAN: Each of you in turn will go in there. Die while the others watch. 
MARLA: Khan. There's no reason I must watch this, is there? 
KHAN: (Shakes his head) But I hoped you would be stronger. (She leaves) If any one of you joins me, anyone! I'll let him live. It's so useless! 
JOACHIM: We've lost the channel. How do I regain picture? 
KHAN: It does not matter. The Captain is dead. Take Mister Spock next.

[Decompression chamber]

(There is one young man standing guard by the chamber door.) 
MARLA: Khan said to watch him very closely. He may decide to co-operate. 
(As he turns to look in the porthole, she injects him. He passes out and she repressurises the chamber, freeing Kirk.) 
MARLA: Captain, I saved your life. Now please don't kill him. 
(The outer Sickbay door opens, Kirk waits and then tackles Spock's guard. Spock neck-pinches him.) 
SPOCK: Surprised to see you, Captain, though pleased. 
KIRK: I'm a little pleased myself. Situation? 
SPOCK: Khan is holding our staff in the briefing room. His men have control of the ship. 
KIRK: Our only chance is the intruder control circuit. Although he's cut it off at the Bridge. 
SPOCK: There's a relay junction down the corridor. 
KIRK: Gas all decks but this one.

[Briefing room]

KHAN: Armoury, this is Khan. Report. Rodriguez. Ling. McPherson. Anyone. Report status. 
(Gas starts coming out of the ventilation grill. Khan flees, Scott hits a guard and gives chase. Everyone else coughs.)

[Corridor]

KIRK: Where's Khan? 
SCOTT: I don't know. He got out just as the gas 
KIRK: Kirk here. 
SPOCK [OC]: Anesthesia gas in all sections except Engineering. Someone just closed that line.

[Engineering]

(Khan is working controls and listening to the intercom messages.) 
SPOCK [OC]: Captain, acknowledge. Unable to flood Engineering section. I suspect 
SCOTT [OC]: This is Scott. Captain's headed for the Engineering section. I'll follow in case 
SPOCK [OC]: Negative. We must retake the vessel while the anesthesia lasts. Meet me in the Armoury. I'm blowing it clear first. Spock out. 
(Kirk dashes into Engineering and straight into Khan, who easily disarms him then crushes the phaser. Then an alarm beeps.) 
KHAN: If I understood your manuals, that's an overload in progress. Your ship flares up like an exploding sun within minutes. 
(The two fight. Khan can throw Kirk around with little effort.) 
KHAN: I have five times your strength. You're no match for me.
(But Kirk gets himself a weapon and clubs Khan into unconsciousness before stopping the overload and saving his ship.)

Captain's Log. Stardate 3143.3. Control of the Enterprise has been regained. I wish my next decisions were no more difficult. Khan and his people. What a waste to put them in a reorientation centre. And what do I do about McGivers?

[Briefing room]

(The senior staff are in dress uniform again.) 
UHURA: Record tapes engaged and ready, Captain. 
KIRK: This hearing is now in session. Under the authority vested in me by Starfleet Command, I declare all charges and specifications in this matter have been dropped. 
MCCOY: Jim. Agreed you have the authority 
KIRK: Mister Spock, our heading takes us near the Ceti Alpha star system. 
SPOCK: Quite correct, Captain. Planet number five there is habitable, although a bit savage, somewhat inhospitable. 
KIRK: But no more than Australia's Botany Bay colony was at the beginning. Those men went on to tame a continent, Mister Khan. Can you tame a world? 
KHAN: Have you ever read Milton, Captain? 
KIRK: Yes. I understand. Lieutenant Marla McGivers. Given a choice of court martial or accompanying them there. 
KHAN: (gazing into her eyes) It will be difficult. A struggle at first even to stay alive, to find food. 
MARLA: I'll go with him, sir. 
KHAN: A superior woman. I will take her. And I've gotten something else I wanted. A world to win, an empire to build. 
KIRK: This hearing is closed. 
(Khan and McGivers are escorted out.)
SCOTT: It's a shame for a good Scotsman to admit it, but I'm not up on Milton. 
KIRK: The statement Lucifer made when he fell into the pit. 'It is better to rule in hell than serve in heaven.' 
SPOCK: It would be interesting, Captain, to return to that world in a hundred years and to learn what crop has sprung from the seed you planted today. 
KIRK: Yes, Mister Spock, it would indeed

1:1 Now these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt; every man and his household came with Jacob.

1:2 Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, 1:3 Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin, 1:4 Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.

1:5 And all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy souls: for Joseph was in Egypt already.

1:6 And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.

1:7 And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land was filled with them.

1:8 Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.

1:9 And he said unto his people, Behold, the people of the children of Israel are more and mightier than we: 1:10 Come on, let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when there falleth out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and so get them up out of the land.

1:11 Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses.

1:12 But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew.

And they were grieved because of the children of Israel.

1:13 And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour: 1:14 And they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in morter, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field: all their service, wherein they made them serve, was with rigour.

1:15 And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah: 1:16 And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and see them upon the stools; if it be a son, then ye shall kill him: but if it be a daughter, then she shall live.

1:17 But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men children alive.

1:18 And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men children alive? 1:19 And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women; for they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them.

1:20 Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty.

1:21 And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses.

1:22 And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive.

2:1 And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi.

2:2 And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid him three months.

2:3 And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river's brink.

2:4 And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him.

2:5 And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and her maidens walked along by the river's side; and when she saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.

2:6 And when she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children.

2:7 Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee? 2:8 And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called the child's mother.

2:9 And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the women took the child, and nursed it.

2:10 And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name Moses: and she said, Because I drew him out of the water.

2:11 And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens: and he spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren.

2:12 And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he slew the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.

2:13 And when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the Hebrews strove together: and he said to him that did the wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow? 2:14 And he said, Who made thee a prince and a judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian? And Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing is known.

2:15 Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian: and he sat down by a well.

2:16 Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters: and they came and drew water, and filled the troughs to water their father's flock.

2:17 And the shepherds came and drove them away: but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock.

2:18 And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, How is it that ye are come so soon to day? 2:19 And they said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water enough for us, and watered the flock.

2:20 And he said unto his daughters, And where is he? why is it that ye have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread.

2:21 And Moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.

2:22 And she bare him a son, and he called his name Gershom: for he said, I have been a stranger in a strange land.

2:23 And it came to pass in process of time, that the king of Egypt died: and the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the bondage.

2:24 And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.

2:25 And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect unto them.

3:1 Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father in law, the priest of Midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb.

3:2 And the angel of the LORD appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.

3:3 And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.

3:4 And when the LORD saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I.

3:5 And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

3:6 Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God.

3:7 And the LORD said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows; 3:8 And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites.

3:9 Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them.

3:10 Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt.

3:11 And Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt? 3:12 And he said, Certainly I will be with thee; and this shall be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee: When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.

3:13 And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them? 3:14 And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you.

3:15 And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, the LORD God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.

3:16 Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, The LORD God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited you, and seen that which is done to you in Egypt: 3:17 And I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.

3:18 And they shall hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt come, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye shall say unto him, The LORD God of the Hebrews hath met with us: and now let us go, we beseech thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the LORD our God.

3:19 And I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand.

3:20 And I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will let you go.

3:21 And I will give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians: and it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty.

3:22 But every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your daughters; and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.

4:1 And Moses answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, The LORD hath not appeared unto thee.

4:2 And the LORD said unto him, What is that in thine hand? And he said, A rod.

4:3 And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it.

4:4 And the LORD said unto Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by the tail. And he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand: 4:5 That they may believe that the LORD God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared unto thee.

4:6 And the LORD said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow.

4:7 And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.

4:8 And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign.

4:9 And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and the water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.

4:10 And Moses said unto the LORD, O my LORD, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.

4:11 And the LORD said unto him, Who hath made man's mouth? or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not I the LORD? 4:12 Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say.

4:13 And he said, O my LORD, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send.

4:14 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Moses, and he said, Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart.

4:15 And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do.

4:16 And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be, even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God.

4:17 And thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt do signs.

4:18 And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law, and said unto him, Let me go, I pray thee, and return unto my brethren which are in Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.

4:19 And the LORD said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt: for all the men are dead which sought thy life.

4:20 And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt: and Moses took the rod of God in his hand.

4:21 And the LORD said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into Egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine hand: but I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go.

4:22 And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the LORD, Israel is my son, even my firstborn: 4:23 And I say unto thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will slay thy son, even thy firstborn.

4:24 And it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the LORD met him, and sought to kill him.

4:25 Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art thou to me.

4:26 So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband thou art, because of the circumcision.

4:27 And the LORD said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him in the mount of God, and kissed him.

4:28 And Moses told Aaron all the words of the LORD who had sent him, and all the signs which he had commanded him.

4:29 And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the children of Israel: 4:30 And Aaron spake all the words which the LORD had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the people.

4:31 And the people believed: and when they heard that the LORD had visited the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.

5:1 And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.

5:2 And Pharaoh said, Who is the LORD, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the LORD, neither will I let Israel go.

5:3 And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us: let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto the LORD our God; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the sword.

5:4 And the king of Egypt said unto them, Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.

5:5 And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land now are many, and ye make them rest from their burdens.

5:6 And Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people, and their officers, saying, 5:7 Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for themselves.

5:8 And the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish ought thereof: for they be idle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God.

5:9 Let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour therein; and let them not regard vain words.

5:10 And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers, and they spake to the people, saying, Thus saith Pharaoh, I will not give you straw.

5:11 Go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your work shall be diminished.

5:12 So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble instead of straw.

5:13 And the taskmasters hasted them, saying, Fulfil your works, your daily tasks, as when there was straw.

5:14 And the officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, Wherefore have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick both yesterday and to day, as heretofore? 5:15 Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore dealest thou thus with thy servants? 5:16 There is no straw given unto thy servants, and they say to us, Make brick: and, behold, thy servants are beaten; but the fault is in thine own people.

5:17 But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle: therefore ye say, Let us go and do sacrifice to the LORD.

5:18 Go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.

5:19 And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were in evil case, after it was said, Ye shall not minish ought from your bricks of your daily task.

5:20 And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh: 5:21 And they said unto them, The LORD look upon you, and judge; because ye have made our savour to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to slay us.

5:22 And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said, LORD, wherefore hast thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me? 5:23 For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.

6:1 Then the LORD said unto Moses, Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.

6:2 And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the LORD: 6:3 And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them.

6:4 And I have also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers.

6:5 And I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I have remembered my covenant.

6:6 Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the LORD, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with great judgments: 6:7 And I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God: and ye shall know that I am the LORD your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.

6:8 And I will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which I did swear to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it you for an heritage: I am the LORD.

6:9 And Moses spake so unto the children of Israel: but they hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

6:10 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 6:11 Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.

6:12 And Moses spake before the LORD, saying, Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips? 6:13 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.

6:14 These be the heads of their fathers' houses: The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel; Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi: these be the families of Reuben.

6:15 And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman: these are the families of Simeon.

6:16 And these are the names of the sons of Levi according to their generations; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari: and the years of the life of Levi were an hundred thirty and seven years.

6:17 The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi, according to their families.

6:18 And the sons of Kohath; Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel: and the years of the life of Kohath were an hundred thirty and three years.

6:19 And the sons of Merari; Mahali and Mushi: these are the families of Levi according to their generations.

6:20 And Amram took him Jochebed his father's sister to wife; and she bare him Aaron and Moses: and the years of the life of Amram were an hundred and thirty and seven years.

6:21 And the sons of Izhar; Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.

6:22 And the sons of Uzziel; Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithri.

6:23 And Aaron took him Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab, sister of Naashon, to wife; and she bare him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

6:24 And the sons of Korah; Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these are the families of the Korhites.

6:25 And Eleazar Aaron's son took him one of the daughters of Putiel to wife; and she bare him Phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.

6:26 These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom the LORD said, Bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their armies.

6:27 These are they which spake to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt: these are that Moses and Aaron.

6:28 And it came to pass on the day when the LORD spake unto Moses in the land of Egypt, 6:29 That the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, I am the LORD: speak thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I say unto thee.

6:30 And Moses said before the LORD, Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?

7:1 And the LORD said unto Moses, See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.

7:2 Thou shalt speak all that I command thee: and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he send the children of Israel out of his land.

7:3 And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.

7:4 But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.

7:5 And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I stretch forth mine hand upon Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from among them.

7:6 And Moses and Aaron did as the LORD commanded them, so did they.

7:7 And Moses was fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three years old, when they spake unto Pharaoh.

7:8 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 7:9 When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, Shew a miracle for you: then thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast it before Pharaoh, and it shall become a serpent.

7:10 And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the LORD had commanded: and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it became a serpent.

7:11 Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the magicians of Egypt, they also did in like manner with their enchantments.

7:12 For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents: but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.

7:13 And he hardened Pharaoh's heart, that he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said.

7:14 And the LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened, he refuseth to let the people go.

7:15 Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the water; and thou shalt stand by the river's brink against he come; and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand.

7:16 And thou shalt say unto him, The LORD God of the Hebrews hath sent me unto thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear.

7:17 Thus saith the LORD, In this thou shalt know that I am the LORD: behold, I will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.

7:18 And the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall stink; and the Egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the river.

7:19 And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thine hand upon the waters of Egypt, upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of water, that they may become blood; and that there may be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood, and in vessels of stone.

7:20 And Moses and Aaron did so, as the LORD commanded; and he lifted up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood.

7:21 And the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank, and the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the river; and there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt.

7:22 And the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments: and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the LORD had said.

7:23 And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set his heart to this also.

7:24 And all the Egyptians digged round about the river for water to drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.

7:25 And seven days were fulfilled, after that the LORD had smitten the river.

8:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

8:2 And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs: 8:3 And the river shall bring forth frogs abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs: 8:4 And the frogs shall come up both on thee, and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants.

8:5 And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt.

8:6 And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.

8:7 And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt.

8:8 Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Intreat the LORD, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and I will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the LORD.

8:9 And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me: when shall I intreat for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river only? 8:10 And he said, To morrow. And he said, Be it according to thy word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the LORD our God.

8:11 And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river only.

8:12 And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh: and Moses cried unto the LORD because of the frogs which he had brought against Pharaoh.

8:13 And the LORD did according to the word of Moses; and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields.

8:14 And they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank.

8:15 But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said.

8:16 And the LORD said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout all the land of Egypt.

8:17 And they did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of Egypt.

8:18 And the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.

8:19 Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God: and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said.

8:20 And the LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

8:21 Else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I will send swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses: and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.

8:22 And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou mayest know that I am the LORD in the midst of the earth.

8:23 And I will put a division between my people and thy people: to morrow shall this sign be.

8:24 And the LORD did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants' houses, and into all the land of Egypt: the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of flies.

8:25 And Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land.

8:26 And Moses said, It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the LORD our God: lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us? 8:27 We will go three days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to the LORD our God, as he shall command us.

8:28 And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the LORD your God in the wilderness; only ye shall not go very far away: intreat for me.

8:29 And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and I will intreat the LORD that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, to morrow: but let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the LORD.

8:30 And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the LORD.

8:31 And the LORD did according to the word of Moses; and he removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people; there remained not one.

8:32 And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would he let the people go.

9:1 Then the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him, Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

9:2 For if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still, 9:3 Behold, the hand of the LORD is upon thy cattle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain.

9:4 And the LORD shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt: and there shall nothing die of all that is the children's of Israel.

9:5 And the LORD appointed a set time, saying, To morrow the LORD shall do this thing in the land.

9:6 And the LORD did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one.

9:7 And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go.

9:8 And the LORD said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight of Pharaoh.

9:9 And it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.

9:10 And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast.

9:11 And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the Egyptians.

9:12 And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had spoken unto Moses.

9:13 And the LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

9:14 For I will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that there is none like me in all the earth.

9:15 For now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smite thee and thy people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.

9:16 And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.

9:17 As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt not let them go? 9:18 Behold, to morrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt since the foundation thereof even until now.

9:19 Send therefore now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast in the field; for upon every man and beast which shall be found in the field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon them, and they shall die.

9:20 He that feared the word of the LORD among the servants of Pharaoh made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses: 9:21 And he that regarded not the word of the LORD left his servants and his cattle in the field.

9:22 And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch forth thine hand toward heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of Egypt.

9:23 And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the LORD sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the LORD rained hail upon the land of Egypt.

9:24 So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.

9:25 And the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the field, and brake every tree of the field.

9:26 Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was there no hail.

9:27 And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned this time: the LORD is righteous, and I and my people are wicked.

9:28 Intreat the LORD (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty thunderings and hail; and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer.

9:29 And Moses said unto him, As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will spread abroad my hands unto the LORD; and the thunder shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how that the earth is the LORD's.

9:30 But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not yet fear the LORD God.

9:31 And the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was bolled.

9:32 But the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not grown up.

9:33 And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread abroad his hands unto the LORD: and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth.

9:34 And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants.

9:35 And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the children of Israel go; as the LORD had spoken by Moses.

10:1 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh: for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that I might shew these my signs before him: 10:2 And that thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things I have wrought in Egypt, and my signs which I have done among them; that ye may know how that I am the LORD.

10:3 And Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me.

10:4 Else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will I bring the locusts into thy coast: 10:5 And they shall cover the face of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field: 10:6 And they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians; which neither thy fathers, nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they were upon the earth unto this day. And he turned himself, and went out from Pharaoh.

10:7 And Pharaoh's servants said unto him, How long shall this man be a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the LORD their God: knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed? 10:8 And Moses and Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh: and he said unto them, Go, serve the LORD your God: but who are they that shall go? 10:9 And Moses said, We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go; for we must hold a feast unto the LORD.

10:10 And he said unto them, Let the LORD be so with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones: look to it; for evil is before you.

10:11 Not so: go now ye that are men, and serve the LORD; for that ye did desire. And they were driven out from Pharaoh's presence.

10:12 And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail hath left.

10:13 And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the LORD brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.

10:14 And the locust went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the coasts of Egypt: very grievous were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.

10:15 For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all the land of Egypt.

10:16 Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said, I have sinned against the LORD your God, and against you.

10:17 Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin only this once, and intreat the LORD your God, that he may take away from me this death only.

10:18 And he went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the LORD.

10:19 And the LORD turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away the locusts, and cast them into the Red sea; there remained not one locust in all the coasts of Egypt.

10:20 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go.

10:21 And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt.

10:22 And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days: 10:23 They saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days: but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings.

10:24 And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go ye, serve the LORD; only let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your little ones also go with you.

10:25 And Moses said, Thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the LORD our God.

10:26 Our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be left behind; for thereof must we take to serve the LORD our God; and we know not with what we must serve the LORD, until we come thither.

10:27 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them go.

10:28 And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more; for in that day thou seest my face thou shalt die.

10:29 And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again no more.

11:1 And the LORD said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence: when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether.

11:2 Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver and jewels of gold.

11:3 And the LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians.

Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of the people.

11:4 And Moses said, Thus saith the LORD, About midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt: 11:5 And all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the first born of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the mill; and all the firstborn of beasts.

11:6 And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more.

11:7 But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that the LORD doth put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel.

11:8 And all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down themselves unto me, saying, Get thee out, and all the people that follow thee: and after that I will go out. And he went out from Pharaoh in a great anger.

11:9 And the LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you; that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.

11:10 And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh: and the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go out of his land.

12:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt saying, 12:2 This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you.

12:3 Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house: 12:4 And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house take it according to the number of the souls; every man according to his eating shall make your count for the lamb.

12:5 Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats: 12:6 And ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening.

12:7 And they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat it.

12:8 And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it.

12:9 Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire; his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof.

12:10 And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.

12:11 And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste: it is the LORD's passover.

12:12 For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the LORD.

12:13 And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.

12:14 And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the LORD throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.

12:15 Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.

12:16 And in the first day there shall be an holy convocation, and in the seventh day there shall be an holy convocation to you; no manner of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat, that only may be done of you.

12:17 And ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this selfsame day have I brought your armies out of the land of Egypt: therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations by an ordinance for ever.

12:18 In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the month at even.

12:19 Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger, or born in the land.

12:20 Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread.

12:21 Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said unto them, Draw out and take you a lamb according to your families, and kill the passover.

12:22 And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out at the door of his house until the morning.

12:23 For the LORD will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the LORD will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you.

12:24 And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever.

12:25 And it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the LORD will give you, according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep this service.

12:26 And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this service? 12:27 That ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the LORD's passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshipped.

12:28 And the children of Israel went away, and did as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

12:29 And it came to pass, that at midnight the LORD smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.

12:30 And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a house where there was not one dead.

12:31 And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up, and get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve the LORD, as ye have said.

12:32 Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; and bless me also.

12:33 And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might send them out of the land in haste; for they said, We be all dead men.

12:34 And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.

12:35 And the children of Israel did according to the word of Moses; and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: 12:36 And the LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things as they required. And they spoiled the Egyptians.

12:37 And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot that were men, beside children.

12:38 And a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and herds, even very much cattle.

12:39 And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened; because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any victual.

12:40 Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.

12:41 And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts of the LORD went out from the land of Egypt.

12:42 It is a night to be much observed unto the LORD for bringing them out from the land of Egypt: this is that night of the LORD to be observed of all the children of Israel in their generations.

12:43 And the LORD said unto Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of the passover: There shall no stranger eat thereof: 12:44 But every man's servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof.

12:45 A foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.

12:46 In one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone thereof.

12:47 All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.

12:48 And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to the LORD, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

12:49 One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you.

12:50 Thus did all the children of Israel; as the LORD commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

12:51 And it came to pass the selfsame day, that the LORD did bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.

13:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 13:2 Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.

13:3 And Moses said unto the people, Remember this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of hand the LORD brought you out from this place: there shall no leavened bread be eaten.

13:4 This day came ye out in the month Abib.

13:5 And it shall be when the LORD shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in this month.

13:6 Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to the LORD.

13:7 Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days; and there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters.

13:8 And thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the LORD did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt.

13:9 And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the LORD's law may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath the LORD brought thee out of Egypt.

13:10 Thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year to year.

13:11 And it shall be when the LORD shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, as he sware unto thee and to thy fathers, and shall give it thee, 13:12 That thou shalt set apart unto the LORD all that openeth the matrix, and every firstling that cometh of a beast which thou hast; the males shall be the LORD's.

13:13 And every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break his neck: and all the firstborn of man among thy children shalt thou redeem.

13:14 And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shalt say unto him, By strength of hand the LORD brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage: 13:15 And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the LORD slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore I sacrifice to the LORD all that openeth the matrix, being males; but all the firstborn of my children I redeem.

13:16 And it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes: for by strength of hand the LORD brought us forth out of Egypt.

13:17 And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not through the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said, Lest peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt: 13:18 But God led the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the Red sea: and the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.

13:19 And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him: for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you.

13:20 And they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness.

13:21 And the LORD went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night: 13:22 He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the people.

14:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 14:2 Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before Pihahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, over against Baalzephon: before it shall ye encamp by the sea.

14:3 For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in.

14:4 And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, that he shall follow after them; and I will be honoured upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host; that the Egyptians may know that I am the LORD. And they did so.

14:5 And it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled: and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people, and they said, Why have we done this, that we have let Israel go from serving us? 14:6 And he made ready his chariot, and took his people with him: 14:7 And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over every one of them.

14:8 And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the children of Israel: and the children of Israel went out with an high hand.

14:9 But the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Baalzephon.

14:10 And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians marched after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of Israel cried out unto the LORD.

14:11 And they said unto Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of Egypt? 14:12 Is not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For it had been better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness.

14:13 And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the LORD, which he will shew to you to day: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever.

14:14 The LORD shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.

14:15 And the LORD said unto Moses, Wherefore criest thou unto me? speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward: 14:16 But lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and divide it: and the children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of the sea.

14:17 And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall follow them: and I will get me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.

14:18 And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I have gotten me honour upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.

14:19 And the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them: 14:20 And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the one came not near the other all the night.

14:21 And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the LORD caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.

14:22 And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground: and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.

14:23 And the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst of the sea, even all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.

14:24 And it came to pass, that in the morning watch the LORD looked unto the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians, 14:25 And took off their chariot wheels, that they drave them heavily: so that the Egyptians said, Let us flee from the face of Israel; for the LORD fighteth for them against the Egyptians.

14:26 And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.

14:27 And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to his strength when the morning appeared; and the Egyptians fled against it; and the LORD overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea.

14:28 And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh that came into the sea after them; there remained not so much as one of them.

14:29 But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea; and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.

14:30 Thus the LORD saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore.

14:31 And Israel saw that great work which the LORD did upon the Egyptians: and the people feared the LORD, and believed the LORD, and his servant Moses.

15:1 Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the LORD, and spake, saying, I will sing unto the LORD, for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.

15:2 The LORD is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: he is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation; my father's God, and I will exalt him.

15:3 The LORD is a man of war: the LORD is his name.

15:4 Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: his chosen captains also are drowned in the Red sea.

15:5 The depths have covered them: they sank into the bottom as a stone.

15:6 Thy right hand, O LORD, is become glorious in power: thy right hand, O LORD, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.

15:7 And in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thee: thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble.

15:8 And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together, the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea.

15:9 The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.

15:10 Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank as lead in the mighty waters.

15:11 Who is like unto thee, O LORD, among the gods? who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? 15:12 Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.

15:13 Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed: thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation.

15:14 The people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of Palestina.

15:15 Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed; the mighty men of Moab, trembling shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.

15:16 Fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the greatness of thine arm they shall be as still as a stone; till thy people pass over, O LORD, till the people pass over, which thou hast purchased.

15:17 Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place, O LORD, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, in the Sanctuary, O LORD, which thy hands have established.

15:18 The LORD shall reign for ever and ever.

15:19 For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and the LORD brought again the waters of the sea upon them; but the children of Israel went on dry land in the midst of the sea.

15:20 And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances.

15:21 And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the LORD, for he hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.

15:22 So Moses brought Israel from the Red sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water.

15:23 And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah, for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called Marah.

15:24 And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink? 15:25 And he cried unto the LORD; and the LORD shewed him a tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made sweet: there he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he proved them, 15:26 And said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the LORD thy God, and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of these diseases upon thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the LORD that healeth thee.

15:27 And they came to Elim, where were twelve wells of water, and threescore and ten palm trees: and they encamped there by the waters.

16:1 And they took their journey from Elim, and all the congregation of the children of Israel came unto the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt.

16:2 And the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness: 16:3 And the children of Israel said unto them, Would to God we had died by the hand of the LORD in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.

16:4 Then said the LORD unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate every day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or no.

16:5 And it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall prepare that which they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.

16:6 And Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel, At even, then ye shall know that the LORD hath brought you out from the land of Egypt: 16:7 And in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of the LORD; for that he heareth your murmurings against the LORD: and what are we, that ye murmur against us? 16:8 And Moses said, This shall be, when the LORD shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to the full; for that the LORD heareth your murmurings which ye murmur against him: and what are we? your murmurings are not against us, but against the LORD.

16:9 And Moses spake unto Aaron, Say unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, Come near before the LORD: for he hath heard your murmurings.

16:10 And it came to pass, as Aaron spake unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel, that they looked toward the wilderness, and, behold, the glory of the LORD appeared in the cloud.

16:11 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 16:12 I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel: speak unto them, saying, At even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread; and ye shall know that I am the LORD your God.

16:13 And it came to pass, that at even the quails came up, and covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay round about the host.

16:14 And when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar frost on the ground.

16:15 And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another, It is manna: for they wist not what it was. And Moses said unto them, This is the bread which the LORD hath given you to eat.

16:16 This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded, Gather of it every man according to his eating, an omer for every man, according to the number of your persons; take ye every man for them which are in his tents.

16:17 And the children of Israel did so, and gathered, some more, some less.

16:18 And when they did mete it with an omer, he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack; they gathered every man according to his eating.

16:19 And Moses said, Let no man leave of it till the morning.

16:20 Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses; but some of them left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and Moses was wroth with them.

16:21 And they gathered it every morning, every man according to his eating: and when the sun waxed hot, it melted.

16:22 And it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one man: and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.

16:23 And he said unto them, This is that which the LORD hath said, To morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the LORD: bake that which ye will bake to day, and seethe that ye will seethe; and that which remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.

16:24 And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bade: and it did not stink, neither was there any worm therein.

16:25 And Moses said, Eat that to day; for to day is a sabbath unto the LORD: to day ye shall not find it in the field.

16:26 Six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is the sabbath, in it there shall be none.

16:27 And it came to pass, that there went out some of the people on the seventh day for to gather, and they found none.

16:28 And the LORD said unto Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my commandments and my laws? 16:29 See, for that the LORD hath given you the sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two days; abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the seventh day.

16:30 So the people rested on the seventh day.

16:31 And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna: and it was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey.

16:32 And Moses said, This is the thing which the LORD commandeth, Fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may see the bread wherewith I have fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.

16:33 And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot, and put an omer full of manna therein, and lay it up before the LORD, to be kept for your generations.

16:34 As the LORD commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept.

16:35 And the children of Israel did eat manna forty years, until they came to a land inhabited; they did eat manna, until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan.

16:36 Now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.

17:1 And all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, after their journeys, according to the commandment of the LORD, and pitched in Rephidim: and there was no water for the people to drink.

17:2 Wherefore the people did chide with Moses, and said, Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with me? wherefore do ye tempt the LORD? 17:3 And the people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst? 17:4 And Moses cried unto the LORD, saying, What shall I do unto this people? they be almost ready to stone me.

17:5 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go.

17:6 Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel.

17:7 And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of the chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the LORD, saying, Is the LORD among us, or not? 17:8 Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim.

17:9 And Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek: to morrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in mine hand.

17:10 So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.

17:11 And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.

17:12 But Moses hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.

17:13 And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.

17:14 And the LORD said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.

17:15 And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovahnissi: 17:16 For he said, Because the LORD hath sworn that the LORD will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.

18:1 When Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father in law, heard of all that God had done for Moses, and for Israel his people, and that the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt; 18:2 Then Jethro, Moses' father in law, took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her back, 18:3 And her two sons; of which the name of the one was Gershom; for he said, I have been an alien in a strange land: 18:4 And the name of the other was Eliezer; for the God of my father, said he, was mine help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh: 18:5 And Jethro, Moses' father in law, came with his sons and his wife unto Moses into the wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of God: 18:6 And he said unto Moses, I thy father in law Jethro am come unto thee, and thy wife, and her two sons with her.

18:7 And Moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance, and kissed him; and they asked each other of their welfare; and they came into the tent.

18:8 And Moses told his father in law all that the LORD had done unto Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake, and all the travail that had come upon them by the way, and how the LORD delivered them.

18:9 And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the LORD had done to Israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand of the Egyptians.

18:10 And Jethro said, Blessed be the LORD, who hath delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who hath delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians.

18:11 Now I know that the LORD is greater than all gods: for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them.

18:12 And Jethro, Moses' father in law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God: and Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses' father in law before God.

18:13 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people: and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto the evening.

18:14 And when Moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto even? 18:15 And Moses said unto his father in law, Because the people come unto me to enquire of God: 18:16 When they have a matter, they come unto me; and I judge between one and another, and I do make them know the statutes of God, and his laws.

18:17 And Moses' father in law said unto him, The thing that thou doest is not good.

18:18 Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone.

18:19 Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee: Be thou for the people to God-ward, that thou mayest bring the causes unto God: 18:20 And thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do.

18:21 Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens: 18:22 And let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee.

18:23 If thou shalt do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou shalt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace.

18:24 So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did all that he had said.

18:25 And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.

18:26 And they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter they judged themselves.

18:27 And Moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into his own land.

19:1 In the third month, when the children of Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai.

19:2 For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the desert of Sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there Israel camped before the mount.

19:3 And Moses went up unto God, and the LORD called unto him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel; 19:4 Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto myself.

19:5 Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: 19:6 And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.

These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel.

19:7 And Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and laid before their faces all these words which the LORD commanded him.

19:8 And all the people answered together, and said, All that the LORD hath spoken we will do. And Moses returned the words of the people unto the LORD.

19:9 And the LORD said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever.

And Moses told the words of the people unto the LORD.

19:10 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes, 19:11 And be ready against the third day: for the third day the LORD will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai.

19:12 And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death: 19:13 There shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.

19:14 And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes.

19:15 And he said unto the people, Be ready against the third day: come not at your wives.

19:16 And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that was in the camp trembled.

19:17 And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.

19:18 And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the LORD descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.

19:19 And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice.

19:20 And the LORD came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount: and the LORD called Moses up to the top of the mount; and Moses went up.

19:21 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the LORD to gaze, and many of them perish.

19:22 And let the priests also, which come near to the LORD, sanctify themselves, lest the LORD break forth upon them.

19:23 And Moses said unto the LORD, The people cannot come up to mount Sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, Set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it.

19:24 And the LORD said unto him, Away, get thee down, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the people break through to come up unto the LORD, lest he break forth upon them.

19:25 So Moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them.

20:1 And God spake all these words, saying, 20:2 I am the LORD thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

20:3 Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

20:4 Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth.

20:5 Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; 20:6 And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.

20:7 Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in vain; for the LORD will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

20:8 Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

20:9 Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work: 20:10 But the seventh day is the sabbath of the LORD thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: 20:11 For in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the LORD blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

20:12 Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

20:13 Thou shalt not kill.

20:14 Thou shalt not commit adultery.

20:15 Thou shalt not steal.

20:16 Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

20:17 Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's.

20:18 And all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off.

20:19 And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die.

20:20 And Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not.

20:21 And the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.

20:22 And the LORD said unto Moses, Thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel, Ye have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.

20:23 Ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make unto you gods of gold.

20:24 An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and thine oxen: in all places where I record my name I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.

20:25 And if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it.

20:26 Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon.

21:1 Now these are the judgments which thou shalt set before them.

21:2 If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.

21:3 If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were married, then his wife shall go out with him.

21:4 If his master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master's, and he shall go out by himself.

21:5 And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free: 21:6 Then his master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an aul; and he shall serve him for ever.

21:7 And if a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not go out as the menservants do.

21:8 If she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her unto a strange nation he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her.

21:9 And if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her after the manner of daughters.

21:10 If he take him another wife; her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish.

21:11 And if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out free without money.

21:12 He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to death.

21:13 And if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand; then I will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee.

21:14 But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die.

21:15 And he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely put to death.

21:16 And he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death.

21:17 And he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death.

21:18 And if men strive together, and one smite another with a stone, or with his fist, and he die not, but keepeth his bed: 21:19 If he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit: only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.

21:20 And if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand; he shall be surely punished.

21:21 Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished: for he is his money.

21:22 If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely punished, according as the woman's husband will lay upon him; and he shall pay as the judges determine.

21:23 And if any mischief follow, then thou shalt give life for life, 21:24 Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, 21:25 Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.

21:26 And if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid, that it perish; he shall let him go free for his eye's sake.

21:27 And if he smite out his manservant's tooth, or his maidservant's tooth; he shall let him go free for his tooth's sake.

21:28 If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be quit.

21:29 But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it hath been testified to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be put to death.

21:30 If there be laid on him a sum of money, then he shall give for the ransom of his life whatsoever is laid upon him.

21:31 Whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, according to this judgment shall it be done unto him.

21:32 If the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant; he shall give unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned.

21:33 And if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit, and not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein; 21:34 The owner of the pit shall make it good, and give money unto the owner of them; and the dead beast shall be his.

21:35 And if one man's ox hurt another's, that he die; then they shall sell the live ox, and divide the money of it; and the dead ox also they shall divide.

21:36 Or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past, and his owner hath not kept him in; he shall surely pay ox for ox; and the dead shall be his own.

22:1 If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep.

22:2 If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there shall no blood be shed for him.

22:3 If the sun be risen upon him, there shall be blood shed for him; for he should make full restitution; if he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.

22:4 If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep; he shall restore double.

22:5 If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in another man's field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make restitution.

22:6 If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field, be consumed therewith; he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.

22:7 If a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man's house; if the thief be found, let him pay double.

22:8 If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be brought unto the judges, to see whether he have put his hand unto his neighbour's goods.

22:9 For all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing which another challengeth to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the judges; and whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbour.

22:10 If a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast, to keep; and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it: 22:11 Then shall an oath of the LORD be between them both, that he hath not put his hand unto his neighbour's goods; and the owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not make it good.

22:12 And if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the owner thereof.

22:13 If it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witness, and he shall not make good that which was torn.

22:14 And if a man borrow ought of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or die, the owner thereof being not with it, he shall surely make it good.

22:15 But if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good: if it be an hired thing, it came for his hire.

22:16 And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife.

22:17 If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins.

22:18 Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.

22:19 Whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death.

22:20 He that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the LORD only, he shall be utterly destroyed.

22:21 Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.

22:22 Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.

22:23 If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry; 22:24 And my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.

22:25 If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury.

22:26 If thou at all take thy neighbour's raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down: 22:27 For that is his covering only, it is his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that I will hear; for I am gracious.

22:28 Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people.

22:29 Thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, and of thy liquors: the firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give unto me.

22:30 Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy sheep: seven days it shall be with his dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give it me.

22:31 And ye shall be holy men unto me: neither shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field; ye shall cast it to the dogs.

23:1 Thou shalt not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.

23:2 Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment: 23:3 Neither shalt thou countenance a poor man in his cause.

23:4 If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again.

23:5 If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt surely help with him.

23:6 Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.

23:7 Keep thee far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous slay thou not: for I will not justify the wicked.

23:8 And thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous.

23:9 Also thou shalt not oppress a stranger: for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.

23:10 And six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather in the fruits thereof: 23:11 But the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie still; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what they leave the beasts of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard.

23:12 Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shalt rest: that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.

23:13 And in all things that I have said unto you be circumspect: and make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.

23:14 Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.

23:15 Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread: (thou shalt eat unleavened bread seven days, as I commanded thee, in the time appointed of the month Abib; for in it thou camest out from Egypt: and none shall appear before me empty:) 23:16 And the feast of harvest, the firstfruits of thy labours, which thou hast sown in the field: and the feast of ingathering, which is in the end of the year, when thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the field.

23:17 Three items in the year all thy males shall appear before the LORD God.

23:18 Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the fat of my sacrifice remain until the morning.

23:19 The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk.

23:20 Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.

23:21 Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him.

23:22 But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries.

23:23 For mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites: and I will cut them off.

23:24 Thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works: but thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and quite break down their images.

23:25 And ye shall serve the LORD your God, and he shall bless thy bread, and thy water; and I will take sickness away from the midst of thee.

23:26 There shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren, in thy land: the number of thy days I will fulfil.

23:27 I will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people to whom thou shalt come, and I will make all thine enemies turn their backs unto thee.

23:28 And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee.

23:29 I will not drive them out from before thee in one year; lest the land become desolate, and the beast of the field multiply against thee.

23:30 By little and little I will drive them out from before thee, until thou be increased, and inherit the land.

23:31 And I will set thy bounds from the Red sea even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt drive them out before thee.

23:32 Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.

23:33 They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me: for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare unto thee.

24:1 And he said unto Moses, Come up unto the LORD, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship ye afar off.

24:2 And Moses alone shall come near the LORD: but they shall not come nigh; neither shall the people go up with him.

24:3 And Moses came and told the people all the words of the LORD, and all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words which the LORD hath said will we do.

24:4 And Moses wrote all the words of the LORD, and rose up early in the morning, and builded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel.

24:5 And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the LORD.

24:6 And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.

24:7 And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people: and they said, All that the LORD hath said will we do, and be obedient.

24:8 And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant, which the LORD hath made with you concerning all these words.

24:9 Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel: 24:10 And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness.

24:11 And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink.

24:12 And the LORD said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, and be there: and I will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and commandments which I have written; that thou mayest teach them.

24:13 And Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua: and Moses went up into the mount of God.

24:14 And he said unto the elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we come again unto you: and, behold, Aaron and Hur are with you: if any man have any matters to do, let him come unto them.

24:15 And Moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.

24:16 And the glory of the LORD abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud.

24:17 And the sight of the glory of the LORD was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel.

24:18 And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into the mount: and Moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights.

25:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 25:2 Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering: of every man that giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take my offering.

25:3 And this is the offering which ye shall take of them; gold, and silver, and brass, 25:4 And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, 25:5 And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers' skins, and shittim wood, 25:6 Oil for the light, spices for anointing oil, and for sweet incense, 25:7 Onyx stones, and stones to be set in the ephod, and in the breastplate.

25:8 And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may dwell among them.

25:9 According to all that I shew thee, after the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it.

25:10 And they shall make an ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.

25:11 And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without shalt thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round about.

25:12 And thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in the four corners thereof; and two rings shall be in the one side of it, and two rings in the other side of it.

25:13 And thou shalt make staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.

25:14 And thou shalt put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, that the ark may be borne with them.

25:15 The staves shall be in the rings of the ark: they shall not be taken from it.

25:16 And thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shall give thee.

25:17 And thou shalt make a mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof.

25:18 And thou shalt make two cherubims of gold, of beaten work shalt thou make them, in the two ends of the mercy seat.

25:19 And make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the other end: even of the mercy seat shall ye make the cherubims on the two ends thereof.

25:20 And the cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high, covering the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces shall look one to another; toward the mercy seat shall the faces of the cherubims be.

25:21 And thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony that I shall give thee.

25:22 And there I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubims which are upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which I will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel.

25:23 Thou shalt also make a table of shittim wood: two cubits shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.

25:24 And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about.

25:25 And thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand breadth round about, and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round about.

25:26 And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that are on the four feet thereof.

25:27 Over against the border shall the rings be for places of the staves to bear the table.

25:28 And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold, that the table may be borne with them.

25:29 And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, and covers thereof, and bowls thereof, to cover withal: of pure gold shalt thou make them.

25:30 And thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway.

25:31 And thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work shall the candlestick be made: his shaft, and his branches, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, shall be of the same.

25:32 And six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side: 25:33 Three bowls made like unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch; and three bowls made like almonds in the other branch, with a knop and a flower: so in the six branches that come out of the candlestick.

25:34 And in the candlesticks shall be four bowls made like unto almonds, with their knops and their flowers.

25:35 And there shall be a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches that proceed out of the candlestick.

25:36 Their knops and their branches shall be of the same: all it shall be one beaten work of pure gold.

25:37 And thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof: and they shall light the lamps thereof, that they may give light over against it.

25:38 And the tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, shall be of pure gold.

25:39 Of a talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these vessels.

25:40 And look that thou make them after their pattern, which was shewed thee in the mount.

26:1 Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work shalt thou make them.

26:2 The length of one curtain shall be eight and twenty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and every one of the curtains shall have one measure.

26:3 The five curtains shall be coupled together one to another; and other five curtains shall be coupled one to another.

26:4 And thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and likewise shalt thou make in the uttermost edge of another curtain, in the coupling of the second.

26:5 Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is in the coupling of the second; that the loops may take hold one of another.

26:6 And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains together with the taches: and it shall be one tabernacle.

26:7 And thou shalt make curtains of goats' hair to be a covering upon the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make.

26:8 The length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven curtains shall be all of one measure.

26:9 And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shalt double the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tabernacle.

26:10 And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops in the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.

26:11 And thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and put the taches into the loops, and couple the tent together, that it may be one.

26:12 And the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth, shall hang over the backside of the tabernacle.

26:13 And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, it shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it.

26:14 And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a covering above of badgers' skins.

26:15 And thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood standing up.

26:16 Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half shall be the breadth of one board.

26:17 Two tenons shall there be in one board, set in order one against another: thus shalt thou make for all the boards of the tabernacle.

26:18 And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards on the south side southward.

26:19 And thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.

26:20 And for the second side of the tabernacle on the north side there shall be twenty boards: 26:21 And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.

26:22 And for the sides of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six boards.

26:23 And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.

26:24 And they shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be coupled together above the head of it unto one ring: thus shall it be for them both; they shall be for the two corners.

26:25 And they shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.

26:26 And thou shalt make bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, 26:27 And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward.

26:28 And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from end to end.

26:29 And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings of gold for places for the bars: and thou shalt overlay the bars with gold.

26:30 And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion thereof which was shewed thee in the mount.

26:31 And thou shalt make a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen of cunning work: with cherubims shall it be made: 26:32 And thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim wood overlaid with gold: their hooks shall be of gold, upon the four sockets of silver.

26:33 And thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, that thou mayest bring in thither within the vail the ark of the testimony: and the vail shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most holy.

26:34 And thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place.

26:35 And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north side.

26:36 And thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework.

26:37 And thou shalt make for the hanging five pillars of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold, and their hooks shall be of gold: and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them.

27:1 And thou shalt make an altar of shittim wood, five cubits long, and five cubits broad; the altar shall be foursquare: and the height thereof shall be three cubits.

27:2 And thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners thereof: his horns shall be of the same: and thou shalt overlay it with brass.

27:3 And thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes, and his shovels, and his basons, and his fleshhooks, and his firepans: all the vessels thereof thou shalt make of brass.

27:4 And thou shalt make for it a grate of network of brass; and upon the net shalt thou make four brasen rings in the four corners thereof.

27:5 And thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath, that the net may be even to the midst of the altar.

27:6 And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with brass.

27:7 And the staves shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall be upon the two sides of the altar, to bear it.

27:8 Hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as it was shewed thee in the mount, so shall they make it.

27:9 And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south side southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine twined linen of an hundred cubits long for one side: 27:10 And the twenty pillars thereof and their twenty sockets shall be of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver.

27:11 And likewise for the north side in length there shall be hangings of an hundred cubits long, and his twenty pillars and their twenty sockets of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.

27:12 And for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be hangings of fifty cubits: their pillars ten, and their sockets ten.

27:13 And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be fifty cubits.

27:14 The hangings of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three.

27:15 And on the other side shall be hangings fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three.

27:16 And for the gate of the court shall be an hanging of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework: and their pillars shall be four, and their sockets four.

27:17 All the pillars round about the court shall be filleted with silver; their hooks shall be of silver, and their sockets of brass.

27:18 The length of the court shall be an hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty every where, and the height five cubits of fine twined linen, and their sockets of brass.

27:19 All the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof, and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the court, shall be of brass.

27:20 And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always.

27:21 In the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which is before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall order it from evening to morning before the LORD: it shall be a statute for ever unto their generations on the behalf of the children of Israel.

28:1 And take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons.

28:2 And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory and for beauty.

28:3 And thou shalt speak unto all that are wise hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make Aaron's garments to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

28:4 And these are the garments which they shall make; a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle: and they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

28:5 And they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen.

28:6 And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cunning work.

28:7 It shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two edges thereof; and so it shall be joined together.

28:8 And the curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be of the same, according to the work thereof; even of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

28:9 And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names of the children of Israel: 28:10 Six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their birth.

28:11 With the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the children of Israel: thou shalt make them to be set in ouches of gold.

28:12 And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod for stones of memorial unto the children of Israel: and Aaron shall bear their names before the LORD upon his two shoulders for a memorial.

28:13 And thou shalt make ouches of gold; 28:14 And two chains of pure gold at the ends; of wreathen work shalt thou make them, and fasten the wreathen chains to the ouches.

28:15 And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shalt thou make it.

28:16 Foursquare it shall be being doubled; a span shall be the length thereof, and a span shall be the breadth thereof.

28:17 And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this shall be the first row.

28:18 And the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.

28:19 And the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.

28:20 And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they shall be set in gold in their inclosings.

28:21 And the stones shall be with the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet; every one with his name shall they be according to the twelve tribes.

28:22 And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends of wreathen work of pure gold.

28:23 And thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.

28:24 And thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings which are on the ends of the breastplate.

28:25 And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt fasten in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod before it.

28:26 And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the breastplate in the border thereof, which is in the side of the ephod inward.

28:27 And two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof, over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.

28:28 And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.

28:29 And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy place, for a memorial before the LORD continually.

28:30 And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron's heart, when he goeth in before the LORD: and Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the LORD continually.

28:31 And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue.

28:32 And there shall be an hole in the top of it, in the midst thereof: it shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent.

28:33 And beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and bells of gold between them round about: 28:34 A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe round about.

28:35 And it shall be upon Aaron to minister: and his sound shall be heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before the LORD, and when he cometh out, that he die not.

28:36 And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it, like the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE LORD.

28:37 And thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be.

28:38 And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the LORD.

28:39 And thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt make the mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdle of needlework.

28:40 And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles, and bonnets shalt thou make for them, for glory and for beauty.

28:41 And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him; and shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

28:42 And thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs they shall reach: 28:43 And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in unto the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they come near unto the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not iniquity, and die: it shall be a statute for ever unto him and his seed after him.

29:1 And this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow them, to minister unto me in the priest's office: Take one young bullock, and two rams without blemish, 29:2 And unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou make them.

29:3 And thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams.

29:4 And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water.

29:5 And thou shalt take the garments, and put upon Aaron the coat, and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod: 29:6 And thou shalt put the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.

29:7 Then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his head, and anoint him.

29:8 And thou shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them.

29:9 And thou shalt gird them with girdles, Aaron and his sons, and put the bonnets on them: and the priest's office shall be theirs for a perpetual statute: and thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sons.

29:10 And thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock.

29:11 And thou shalt kill the bullock before the LORD, by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

29:12 And thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger, and pour all the blood beside the bottom of the altar.

29:13 And thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul that is above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar.

29:14 But the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, shalt thou burn with fire without the camp: it is a sin offering.

29:15 Thou shalt also take one ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram.

29:16 And thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take his blood, and sprinkle it round about upon the altar.

29:17 And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of him, and his legs, and put them unto his pieces, and unto his head.

29:18 And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt offering unto the LORD: it is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

29:19 And thou shalt take the other ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram.

29:20 Then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of his blood, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.

29:21 And thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him: and he shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons' garments with him.

29:22 Also thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder; for it is a ram of consecration: 29:23 And one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened bread that is before the LORD: 29:24 And thou shalt put all in the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons; and shalt wave them for a wave offering before the LORD.

29:25 And thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn them upon the altar for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour before the LORD: it is an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

29:26 And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of Aaron's consecration, and wave it for a wave offering before the LORD: and it shall be thy part.

29:27 And thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave offering, and the shoulder of the heave offering, which is waved, and which is heaved up, of the ram of the consecration, even of that which is for Aaron, and of that which is for his sons: 29:28 And it shall be Aaron's and his sons' by a statute for ever from the children of Israel: for it is an heave offering: and it shall be an heave offering from the children of Israel of the sacrifice of their peace offerings, even their heave offering unto the LORD.

29:29 And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons' after him, to be anointed therein, and to be consecrated in them.

29:30 And that son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven days, when he cometh into the tabernacle of the congregation to minister in the holy place.

29:31 And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and seethe his flesh in the holy place.

29:32 And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

29:33 And they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was made, to consecrate and to sanctify them: but a stranger shall not eat thereof, because they are holy.

29:34 And if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread, remain unto the morning, then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire: it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.

29:35 And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, and to his sons, according to all things which I have commanded thee: seven days shalt thou consecrate them.

29:36 And thou shalt offer every day a bullock for a sin offering for atonement: and thou shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it.

29:37 Seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar, and sanctify it; and it shall be an altar most holy: whatsoever toucheth the altar shall be holy.

29:38 Now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar; two lambs of the first year day by day continually.

29:39 The one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even: 29:40 And with the one lamb a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; and the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering.

29:41 And the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and shalt do thereto according to the meat offering of the morning, and according to the drink offering thereof, for a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

29:42 This shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your generations at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the LORD: where I will meet you, to speak there unto thee.

29:43 And there I will meet with the children of Israel, and the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory.

29:44 And I will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar: I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons, to minister to me in the priest's office.

29:45 And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their God.

29:46 And they shall know that I am the LORD their God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell among them: I am the LORD their God.

30:1 And thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: of shittim wood shalt thou make it.

30:2 A cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof; foursquare shall it be: and two cubits shall be the height thereof: the horns thereof shall be of the same.

30:3 And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about.

30:4 And two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it, by the two corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make it; and they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal.

30:5 And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.

30:6 And thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of the testimony, before the mercy seat that is over the testimony, where I will meet with thee.

30:7 And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning: when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon it.

30:8 And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shall burn incense upon it, a perpetual incense before the LORD throughout your generations.

30:9 Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice, nor meat offering; neither shall ye pour drink offering thereon.

30:10 And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a year with the blood of the sin offering of atonements: once in the year shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations: it is most holy unto the LORD.

30:11 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 30:12 When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel after their number, then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the LORD, when thou numberest them; that there be no plague among them, when thou numberest them.

30:13 This they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel is twenty gerahs:) an half shekel shall be the offering of the LORD.

30:14 Every one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty years old and above, shall give an offering unto the LORD.

30:15 The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than half a shekel, when they give an offering unto the LORD, to make an atonement for your souls.

30:16 And thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of Israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the children of Israel before the LORD, to make an atonement for your souls.

30:17 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 30:18 Thou shalt also make a laver of brass, and his foot also of brass, to wash withal: and thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the altar, and thou shalt put water therein.

30:19 For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat: 30:20 When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the LORD: 30:21 So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not: and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to his seed throughout their generations.

30:22 Moreover the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 30:23 Take thou also unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh five hundred shekels, and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty shekels, and of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty shekels, 30:24 And of cassia five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of oil olive an hin: 30:25 And thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound after the art of the apothecary: it shall be an holy anointing oil.

30:26 And thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation therewith, and the ark of the testimony, 30:27 And the table and all his vessels, and the candlestick and his vessels, and the altar of incense, 30:28 And the altar of burnt offering with all his vessels, and the laver and his foot.

30:29 And thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy: whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy.

30:30 And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

30:31 And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations.

30:32 Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make any other like it, after the composition of it: it is holy, and it shall be holy unto you.

30:33 Whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever putteth any of it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his people.

30:34 And the LORD said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight: 30:35 And thou shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the apothecary, tempered together, pure and holy: 30:36 And thou shalt beat some of it very small, and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of the congregation, where I will meet with thee: it shall be unto you most holy.

30:37 And as for the perfume which thou shalt make, ye shall not make to yourselves according to the composition thereof: it shall be unto thee holy for the LORD.

30:38 Whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall even be cut off from his people.

31:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 31:2 See, I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah: 31:3 And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship, 31:4 To devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, 31:5 And in cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of timber, to work in all manner of workmanship.

31:6 And I, behold, I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan: and in the hearts of all that are wise hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee; 31:7 The tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark of the testimony, and the mercy seat that is thereupon, and all the furniture of the tabernacle, 31:8 And the table and his furniture, and the pure candlestick with all his furniture, and the altar of incense, 31:9 And the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the laver and his foot, 31:10 And the cloths of service, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office, 31:11 And the anointing oil, and sweet incense for the holy place: according to all that I have commanded thee shall they do.

31:12 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 31:13 Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am the LORD that doth sanctify you.

31:14 Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you: every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people.

31:15 Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of rest, holy to the LORD: whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death.

31:16 Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant.

31:17 It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever: for in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.

31:18 And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.

32:1 And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

32:2 And Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden earrings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring them unto me.

32:3 And all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought them unto Aaron.

32:4 And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

32:5 And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast to the LORD.

32:6 And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.

32:7 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go, get thee down; for thy people, which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves: 32:8 They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

32:9 And the LORD said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people: 32:10 Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them: and I will make of thee a great nation.

32:11 And Moses besought the LORD his God, and said, LORD, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand? 32:12 Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people.

32:13 Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

32:14 And the LORD repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people.

32:15 And Moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were written on both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.

32:16 And the tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, graven upon the tables.

32:17 And when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto Moses, There is a noise of war in the camp.

32:18 And he said, It is not the voice of them that shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the noise of them that sing do I hear.

32:19 And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf, and the dancing: and Moses' anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.

32:20 And he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.

32:21 And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin upon them? 32:22 And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they are set on mischief.

32:23 For they said unto me, Make us gods, which shall go before us: for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

32:24 And I said unto them, Whosoever hath any gold, let them break it off. So they gave it me: then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf.

32:25 And when Moses saw that the people were naked; (for Aaron had made them naked unto their shame among their enemies:) 32:26 Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Who is on the LORD's side? let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him.

32:27 And he said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Put every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbour.

32:28 And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses: and there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.

32:29 For Moses had said, Consecrate yourselves today to the LORD, even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.

32:30 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses said unto the people, Ye have sinned a great sin: and now I will go up unto the LORD; peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin.

32:31 And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said, Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold.

32:32 Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin--; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written.

32:33 And the LORD said unto Moses, Whosoever hath sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.

32:34 Therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have spoken unto thee: behold, mine Angel shall go before thee: nevertheless in the day when I visit I will visit their sin upon them.

32:35 And the LORD plagued the people, because they made the calf, which Aaron made.

33:1 And the LORD said unto Moses, Depart, and go up hence, thou and the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto the land which I sware unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, Unto thy seed will I give it: 33:2 And I will send an angel before thee; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite: 33:3 Unto a land flowing with milk and honey: for I will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest I consume thee in the way.

33:4 And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and no man did put on him his ornaments.

33:5 For the LORD had said unto Moses, Say unto the children of Israel, Ye are a stiffnecked people: I will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee: therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.

33:6 And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments by the mount Horeb.

33:7 And Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp, afar off from the camp, and called it the Tabernacle of the congregation. And it came to pass, that every one which sought the LORD went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the camp.

33:8 And it came to pass, when Moses went out unto the tabernacle, that all the people rose up, and stood every man at his tent door, and looked after Moses, until he was gone into the tabernacle.

33:9 And it came to pass, as Moses entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and the Lord talked with Moses.

33:10 And all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle door: and all the people rose up and worshipped, every man in his tent door.

33:11 And the LORD spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. And he turned again into the camp: but his servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle.

33:12 And Moses said unto the LORD, See, thou sayest unto me, Bring up this people: and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me. Yet thou hast said, I know thee by name, and thou hast also found grace in my sight.

33:13 Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight, shew me now thy way, that I may know thee, that I may find grace in thy sight: and consider that this nation is thy people.

33:14 And he said, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest.

33:15 And he said unto him, If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.

33:16 For wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? is it not in that thou goest with us? so shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth.

33:17 And the LORD said unto Moses, I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken: for thou hast found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name.

33:18 And he said, I beseech thee, shew me thy glory.

33:19 And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the LORD before thee; and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy.

33:20 And he said, Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live.

33:21 And the LORD said, Behold, there is a place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock: 33:22 And it shall come to pass, while my glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand while I pass by: 33:23 And I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts: but my face shall not be seen.

34:1 And the LORD said unto Moses, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first: and I will write upon these tables the words that were in the first tables, which thou brakest.

34:2 And be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount.

34:3 And no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.

34:4 And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount Sinai, as the LORD had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone.

34:5 And the LORD descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the LORD.

34:6 And the LORD passed by before him, and proclaimed, The LORD, The LORD God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, 34:7 Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, unto the third and to the fourth generation.

34:8 And Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshipped.

34:9 And he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, O LORD, let my LORD, I pray thee, go among us; for it is a stiffnecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance.

34:10 And he said, Behold, I make a covenant: before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation: and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of the LORD: for it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee.

34:11 Observe thou that which I command thee this day: behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.

34:12 Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee: 34:13 But ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down their groves: 34:14 For thou shalt worship no other god: for the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God: 34:15 Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice; 34:16 And thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.

34:17 Thou shalt make thee no molten gods.

34:18 The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, in the time of the month Abib: for in the month Abib thou camest out from Egypt.

34:19 All that openeth the matrix is mine; and every firstling among thy cattle, whether ox or sheep, that is male.

34:20 But the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb: and if thou redeem him not, then shalt thou break his neck. All the firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem. And none shall appear before me empty.

34:21 Six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest: in earing time and in harvest thou shalt rest.

34:22 And thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, of the firstfruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the year's end.

34:23 Thrice in the year shall all your menchildren appear before the LORD God, the God of Israel.

34:24 For I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up to appear before the LORD thy God thrice in the year.

34:25 Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven; neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left unto the morning.

34:26 The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk.

34:27 And the LORD said unto Moses, Write thou these words: for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel.

34:28 And he was there with the LORD forty days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink water. And he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.

34:29 And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony in Moses' hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him.

34:30 And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.

34:31 And Moses called unto them; and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned unto him: and Moses talked with them.

34:32 And afterward all the children of Israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment all that the LORD had spoken with him in mount Sinai.

34:33 And till Moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his face.

34:34 But when Moses went in before the LORD to speak with him, he took the vail off, until he came out. And he came out, and spake unto the children of Israel that which he was commanded.

34:35 And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses' face shone: and Moses put the vail upon his face again, until he went in to speak with him.

35:1 And Moses gathered all the congregation of the children of Israel together, and said unto them, These are the words which the LORD hath commanded, that ye should do them.

35:2 Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you an holy day, a sabbath of rest to the LORD: whosoever doeth work therein shall be put to death.

35:3 Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath day.

35:4 And Moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which the LORD commanded, saying, 35:5 Take ye from among you an offering unto the LORD: whosoever is of a willing heart, let him bring it, an offering of the LORD; gold, and silver, and brass, 35:6 And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, 35:7 And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers' skins, and shittim wood, 35:8 And oil for the light, and spices for anointing oil, and for the sweet incense, 35:9 And onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate.

35:10 And every wise hearted among you shall come, and make all that the LORD hath commanded; 35:11 The tabernacle, his tent, and his covering, his taches, and his boards, his bars, his pillars, and his sockets, 35:12 The ark, and the staves thereof, with the mercy seat, and the vail of the covering, 35:13 The table, and his staves, and all his vessels, and the shewbread, 35:14 The candlestick also for the light, and his furniture, and his lamps, with the oil for the light, 35:15 And the incense altar, and his staves, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the door at the entering in of the tabernacle, 35:16 The altar of burnt offering, with his brasen grate, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot, 35:17 The hangings of the court, his pillars, and their sockets, and the hanging for the door of the court, 35:18 The pins of the tabernacle, and the pins of the court, and their cords, 35:19 The cloths of service, to do service in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office.

35:20 And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.

35:21 And they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the LORD's offering to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his service, and for the holy garments.

35:22 And they came, both men and women, as many as were willing hearted, and brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold: and every man that offered offered an offering of gold unto the LORD.

35:23 And every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, and red skins of rams, and badgers' skins, brought them.

35:24 Every one that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought the LORD's offering: and every man, with whom was found shittim wood for any work of the service, brought it.

35:25 And all the women that were wise hearted did spin with their hands, and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen.

35:26 And all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun goats' hair.

35:27 And the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate; 35:28 And spice, and oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.

35:29 The children of Israel brought a willing offering unto the LORD, every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all manner of work, which the LORD had commanded to be made by the hand of Moses.

35:30 And Moses said unto the children of Israel, See, the LORD hath called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah; 35:31 And he hath filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship; 35:32 And to devise curious works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, 35:33 And in the cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning work.

35:34 And he hath put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan.

35:35 Them hath he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work, of the engraver, and of the cunning workman, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of them that do any work, and of those that devise cunning work.

36:1 Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whom the LORD put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all manner of work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that the LORD had commanded.

36:2 And Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whose heart the LORD had put wisdom, even every one whose heart stirred him up to come unto the work to do it: 36:3 And they received of Moses all the offering, which the children of Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, to make it withal. And they brought yet unto him free offerings every morning.

36:4 And all the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they made; 36:5 And they spake unto Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the service of the work, which the LORD commanded to make.

36:6 And Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary. So the people were restrained from bringing.

36:7 For the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make it, and too much.

36:8 And every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of the tabernacle made ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work made he them.

36:9 The length of one curtain was twenty and eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: the curtains were all of one size.

36:10 And he coupled the five curtains one unto another: and the other five curtains he coupled one unto another.

36:11 And he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling: likewise he made in the uttermost side of another curtain, in the coupling of the second.

36:12 Fifty loops made he in one curtain, and fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain which was in the coupling of the second: the loops held one curtain to another.

36:13 And he made fifty taches of gold, and coupled the curtains one unto another with the taches: so it became one tabernacle.

36:14 And he made curtains of goats' hair for the tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains he made them.

36:15 The length of one curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits was the breadth of one curtain: the eleven curtains were of one size.

36:16 And he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves.

36:17 And he made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.

36:18 And he made fifty taches of brass to couple the tent together, that it might be one.

36:19 And he made a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a covering of badgers' skins above that.

36:20 And he made boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood, standing up.

36:21 The length of a board was ten cubits, and the breadth of a board one cubit and a half.

36:22 One board had two tenons, equally distant one from another: thus did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.

36:23 And he made boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the south side southward: 36:24 And forty sockets of silver he made under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.

36:25 And for the other side of the tabernacle, which is toward the north corner, he made twenty boards, 36:26 And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.

36:27 And for the sides of the tabernacle westward he made six boards.

36:28 And two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.

36:29 And they were coupled beneath, and coupled together at the head thereof, to one ring: thus he did to both of them in both the corners.

36:30 And there were eight boards; and their sockets were sixteen sockets of silver, under every board two sockets.

36:31 And he made bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, 36:32 And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for the sides westward.

36:33 And he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from the one end to the other.

36:34 And he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of gold to be places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold.

36:35 And he made a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: with cherubims made he it of cunning work.

36:36 And he made thereunto four pillars of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold: their hooks were of gold; and he cast for them four sockets of silver.

36:37 And he made an hanging for the tabernacle door of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, of needlework; 36:38 And the five pillars of it with their hooks: and he overlaid their chapiters and their fillets with gold: but their five sockets were of brass.

37:1 And Bezaleel made the ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half was the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it: 37:2 And he overlaid it with pure gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about.

37:3 And he cast for it four rings of gold, to be set by the four corners of it; even two rings upon the one side of it, and two rings upon the other side of it.

37:4 And he made staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.

37:5 And he put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.

37:6 And he made the mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half was the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.

37:7 And he made two cherubims of gold, beaten out of one piece made he them, on the two ends of the mercy seat; 37:8 One cherub on the end on this side, and another cherub on the other end on that side: out of the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof.

37:9 And the cherubims spread out their wings on high, and covered with their wings over the mercy seat, with their faces one to another; even to the mercy seatward were the faces of the cherubims.

37:10 And he made the table of shittim wood: two cubits was the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof: 37:11 And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made thereunto a crown of gold round about.

37:12 Also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about; and made a crown of gold for the border thereof round about.

37:13 And he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon the four corners that were in the four feet thereof.

37:14 Over against the border were the rings, the places for the staves to bear the table.

37:15 And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold, to bear the table.

37:16 And he made the vessels which were upon the table, his dishes, and his spoons, and his bowls, and his covers to cover withal, of pure gold.

37:17 And he made the candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work made he the candlestick; his shaft, and his branch, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, were of the same: 37:18 And six branches going out of the sides thereof; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side thereof: 37:19 Three bowls made after the fashion of almonds in one branch, a knop and a flower; and three bowls made like almonds in another branch, a knop and a flower: so throughout the six branches going out of the candlestick.

37:20 And in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his knops, and his flowers: 37:21 And a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches going out of it.

37:22 Their knops and their branches were of the same: all of it was one beaten work of pure gold.

37:23 And he made his seven lamps, and his snuffers, and his snuffdishes, of pure gold.

37:24 Of a talent of pure gold made he it, and all the vessels thereof.

37:25 And he made the incense altar of shittim wood: the length of it was a cubit, and the breadth of it a cubit; it was foursquare; and two cubits was the height of it; the horns thereof were of the same.

37:26 And he overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns of it: also he made unto it a crown of gold round about.

37:27 And he made two rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by the two corners of it, upon the two sides thereof, to be places for the staves to bear it withal.

37:28 And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.

37:29 And he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of sweet spices, according to the work of the apothecary.

38:1 And he made the altar of burnt offering of shittim wood: five cubits was the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof; it was foursquare; and three cubits the height thereof.

38:2 And he made the horns thereof on the four corners of it; the horns thereof were of the same: and he overlaid it with brass.

38:3 And he made all the vessels of the altar, the pots, and the shovels, and the basons, and the fleshhooks, and the firepans: all the vessels thereof made he of brass.

38:4 And he made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the compass thereof beneath unto the midst of it.

38:5 And he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of brass, to be places for the staves.

38:6 And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with brass.

38:7 And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, to bear it withal; he made the altar hollow with boards.

38:8 And he made the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass, of the lookingglasses of the women assembling, which assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

38:9 And he made the court: on the south side southward the hangings of the court were of fine twined linen, an hundred cubits: 38:10 Their pillars were twenty, and their brasen sockets twenty; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets were of silver.

38:11 And for the north side the hangings were an hundred cubits, their pillars were twenty, and their sockets of brass twenty; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.

38:12 And for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.

38:13 And for the east side eastward fifty cubits.

38:14 The hangings of the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.

38:15 And for the other side of the court gate, on this hand and that hand, were hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.

38:16 All the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined linen.

38:17 And the sockets for the pillars were of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver; and the overlaying of their chapiters of silver; and all the pillars of the court were filleted with silver.

38:18 And the hanging for the gate of the court was needlework, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: and twenty cubits was the length, and the height in the breadth was five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court.

38:19 And their pillars were four, and their sockets of brass four; their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their fillets of silver.

38:20 And all the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about, were of brass.

38:21 This is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of testimony, as it was counted, according to the commandment of Moses, for the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, son to Aaron the priest.

38:22 And Bezaleel the son Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that the LORD commanded Moses.

38:23 And with him was Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.

38:24 All the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of the holy place, even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary.

38:25 And the silver of them that were numbered of the congregation was an hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred and threescore and fifteen shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 38:26 A bekah for every man, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that went to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.

38:27 And of the hundred talents of silver were cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; an hundred sockets of the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.

38:28 And of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their chapiters, and filleted them.

38:29 And the brass of the offering was seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels.

38:30 And therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for it, and all the vessels of the altar, 38:31 And the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the court gate, and all the pins of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.

39:1 And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of service, to do service in the holy place, and made the holy garments for Aaron; as the LORD commanded Moses.

39:2 And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

39:3 And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, with cunning work.

39:4 They made shoulderpieces for it, to couple it together: by the two edges was it coupled together.

39:5 And the curious girdle of his ephod, that was upon it, was of the same, according to the work thereof; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the LORD commanded Moses.

39:6 And they wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven, as signets are graven, with the names of the children of Israel.

39:7 And he put them on the shoulders of the ephod, that they should be stones for a memorial to the children of Israel; as the LORD commanded Moses.

39:8 And he made the breastplate of cunning work, like the work of the ephod; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

39:9 It was foursquare; they made the breastplate double: a span was the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, being doubled.

39:10 And they set in it four rows of stones: the first row was a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this was the first row.

39:11 And the second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.

39:12 And the third row, a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.

39:13 And the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper: they were inclosed in ouches of gold in their inclosings.

39:14 And the stones were according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet, every one with his name, according to the twelve tribes.

39:15 And they made upon the breastplate chains at the ends, of wreathen work of pure gold.

39:16 And they made two ouches of gold, and two gold rings; and put the two rings in the two ends of the breastplate.

39:17 And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings on the ends of the breastplate.

39:18 And the two ends of the two wreathen chains they fastened in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod, before it.

39:19 And they made two rings of gold, and put them on the two ends of the breastplate, upon the border of it, which was on the side of the ephod inward.

39:20 And they made two other golden rings, and put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart of it, over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.

39:21 And they did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from the ephod; as the LORD commanded Moses.

39:22 And he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue.

39:23 And there was an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of an habergeon, with a band round about the hole, that it should not rend.

39:24 And they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.

39:25 And they made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates upon the hem of the robe, round about between the pomegranates; 39:26 A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to minister in; as the LORD commanded Moses.

39:27 And they made coats of fine linen of woven work for Aaron, and for his sons, 39:28 And a mitre of fine linen, and goodly bonnets of fine linen, and linen breeches of fine twined linen, 39:29 And a girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, of needlework; as the LORD commanded Moses.

39:30 And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like to the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE LORD.

39:31 And they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon the mitre; as the LORD commanded Moses.

39:32 Thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation finished: and the children of Israel did according to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so did they.

39:33 And they brought the tabernacle unto Moses, the tent, and all his furniture, his taches, his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and his sockets, 39:34 And the covering of rams' skins dyed red, and the covering of badgers' skins, and the vail of the covering, 39:35 The ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the mercy seat, 39:36 The table, and all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread, 39:37 The pure candlestick, with the lamps thereof, even with the lamps to be set in order, and all the vessels thereof, and the oil for light, 39:38 And the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the tabernacle door, 39:39 The brasen altar, and his grate of brass, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot, 39:40 The hangings of the court, his pillars, and his sockets, and the hanging for the court gate, his cords, and his pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of the congregation, 39:41 The cloths of service to do service in the holy place, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and his sons' garments, to minister in the priest's office.

39:42 According to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the work.

39:43 And Moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done it as the LORD had commanded, even so had they done it: and Moses blessed them.

40:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 40:2 On the first day of the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.

40:3 And thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover the ark with the vail.

40:4 And thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things that are to be set in order upon it; and thou shalt bring in the candlestick, and light the lamps thereof.

40:5 And thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before the ark of the testimony, and put the hanging of the door to the tabernacle.

40:6 And thou shalt set the altar of the burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.

40:7 And thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and shalt put water therein.

40:8 And thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the hanging at the court gate.

40:9 And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels thereof: and it shall be holy.

40:10 And thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering, and all his vessels, and sanctify the altar: and it shall be an altar most holy.

40:11 And thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it.

40:12 And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water.

40:13 And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

40:14 And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats: 40:15 And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.

40:16 Thus did Moses: according to all that the LORD commanded him, so did he.

40:17 And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up.

40:18 And Moses reared up the tabernacle, and fastened his sockets, and set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared up his pillars.

40:19 And he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above upon it; as the LORD commanded Moses.

40:20 And he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put the mercy seat above upon the ark: 40:21 And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the vail of the covering, and covered the ark of the testimony; as the LORD commanded Moses.

40:22 And he put the table in the tent of the congregation, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without the vail.

40:23 And he set the bread in order upon it before the LORD; as the LORD had commanded Moses.

40:24 And he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over against the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward.

40:25 And he lighted the lamps before the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.

40:26 And he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation before the vail: 40:27 And he burnt sweet incense thereon; as the LORD commanded Moses.

40:28 And he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle.

40:29 And he put the altar of burnt offering by the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and offered upon it the burnt offering and the meat offering; as the LORD commanded Moses.

40:30 And he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and put water there, to wash withal.

40:31 And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet thereat: 40:32 When they went into the tent of the congregation, and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the LORD commanded Moses.

40:33 And he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the hanging of the court gate. So Moses finished the work.

40:34 Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle.

40:35 And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle.

40:36 And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel went onward in all their journeys: 40:37 But if the cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it was taken up.

40:38 For the cloud of the LORD was upon the tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.